1:"$Sreact.fragment"
2:I[44048,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/08cykig6vtx_p.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/07qi2okp-.yp9.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0frujd.eyhz4o.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0n4z.7yu76je-.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/12.3u5-pgh3xi.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0r0c80niwkt55.js"],"ConferenceView"]
1f3:I[97367,["/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/08cykig6vtx_p.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/07qi2okp-.yp9.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0frujd.eyhz4o.js","/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0n4z.7yu76je-.js"],"OutletBoundary"]
1f4:"$Sreact.suspense"
3:T572,We introduce DataComp for Language Models (DCLM), a testbed for controlled dataset experiments with the goal of improving language models. As part of DCLM, we provide a standardized corpus of 240T tokens extracted from Common Crawl, effective pretraining recipes based on the OpenLM framework, and a broad suite of 53 downstream evaluations. Participants in the DCLM benchmark can experiment with data curation strategies such as deduplication, filtering, and data mixing at model scales ranging from 412M to 7B parameters. As a baseline for DCLM, we conduct extensive experiments and find that model-based filtering is key to assembling a high-quality training set. The resulting dataset, DCLM-Baseline enables training a 7B parameter language model from scratch to 64% 5-shot accuracy on MMLU with 2.6T training tokens. Compared to MAP-Neo, the previous state-of-the-art in open-data language models, DCLM-Baseline represents a 6.6 percentage point improvement on MMLU while being trained with 40% less compute. Our baseline model is also comparable to Mistral-7B-v0.3 and Llama 3 8B on MMLU (63%&66%), and performs similarly on an average of 53 natural language understanding tasks while being trained with 6.6x less compute than Llama 3 8B. Our results highlight the importance of dataset design for training language models and offer a starting point for further research on data curation.4:T443,The performance of a large language model (LLM) depends heavily on the quality and size of its pretraining dataset. However, the pretraining datasets for state-of-the-art open LLMs like Llama 3 and Mixtral are not publicly available and very little is known about how they were created. In this work, we introduce FineWeb, a 15-trillion token dataset derived from 96 Common Crawl snapshots that produces better-performing LLMs than other open pretraining datasets. To advance the understanding of how best to curate high-quality pretraining datasets, we carefully document and ablate all of the design choices used in FineWeb, including in-depth investigations of deduplication and filtering strategies. In addition, we introduce FineWeb-Edu, a 1.3-trillion token collection of educational text filtered from FineWeb. LLMs pretrained on FineWeb-Edu exhibit dramatically better performance on knowledge- and reasoning-intensive benchmarks like MMLU and ARC. Along with our datasets, we publicly release our data curation codebase and all of the models trained during our ablation experiments.5:T724,Large language models are increasingly becoming a cornerstone technology in artificial intelligence, the sciences, and society as a whole, yet the optimal strategies for dataset composition and filtering remain largely elusive. Many of the top-performing models lack transparency in their dataset curation and model development processes, posing an obstacle to the development of fully open language models. 
In this paper, we identify three core data-related challenges that must be addressed to advance open-source language models. These include (1) transparency in model development, including the data curation process, (2) access to large quantities of high-quality data, and (3) availability of artifacts and metadata for dataset curation and analysis. 
To address these challenges, we release RedPajama-V1, an open reproduction of the LLaMA training dataset. In addition, we release RedPajama-V2, a massive web-only dataset consisting of raw, unfiltered text data together with quality signals and metadata.
Together, the RedPajama datasets comprise over 100 trillion tokens spanning multiple domains and with their quality signals facilitate the filtering of data, aiming to inspire the development of numerous new datasets. To date, these datasets have already been used in the training of strong language models used in production, such as Snowflake Arctic, Salesforce's XGen and AI2's OLMo. To provide insight into the quality of RedPajama, we present a series of analyses and ablation studies with decoder-only language models with up to 1.6B parameters. Our findings demonstrate how quality signals for web data can be effectively leveraged to curate high-quality subsets of the dataset, underscoring the potential of RedPajama to advance the development of transparent and high-performing language models at scale.6:T4b6,We study the fractal structure of language, aiming to provide a precise formalism for quantifying properties that may have been previously suspected but not  formally shown. We establish that language is: (1) self-similar, exhibiting complexities at all levels of granularity, with no particular characteristic context length, and (2) long-range dependent (LRD), with a Hurst parameter of approximately 0.7.
Based on these findings, we argue that short-term patterns/dependencies in language, such as in paragraphs, mirror the patterns/dependencies over larger scopes, like entire documents. This may shed some light on how  next-token prediction can capture the structure of text across multiple levels of granularity, from words and clauses to broader contexts and intents. In addition, we carry out an extensive analysis across different domains and architectures, showing that fractal parameters are robust.
Finally, we demonstrate that the tiny variations  in fractal parameters seen across LLMs improve upon perplexity-based bits-per-byte (BPB) in predicting their downstream performance. We hope these findings offer a fresh perspective on language and the mechanisms underlying the success of LLMs.7:T437,We investigate the rate at which algorithms for pre-training language models have improved since the advent of deep learning. Using a dataset of over 200 language model evaluations on Wikitext and Penn Treebank spanning 2012-2023, we find that the compute required to reach a set performance threshold has halved approximately every 8 months, with a 90\% confidence interval of around 2 to 22 months, substantially faster than hardware gains per Moore's Law. We estimate augmented scaling laws, which enable us to quantify algorithmic progress and determine the relative contributions of scaling models versus innovations in training algorithms. Despite the rapid pace of algorithmic progress and the development of new architectures such as the transformer, our analysis reveals that the increase in compute made an even larger contribution to overall performance improvements over this time period. Though limited by noisy benchmark data, our analysis quantifies the rapid progress in language modeling, shedding light on the relative contributions from compute and algorithms.8:T43f,The quadratic complexity and weak length extrapolation of Transformers limits their ability to scale to long sequences, and while sub-quadratic solutions like linear attention and state space models exist, they empirically underperform Transformers in pretraining efficiency and downstream task accuracy. We introduce Megalodon, a neural architecture for efficient sequence modeling with unlimited context length. Megalodon inherits the architecture of Mega (exponential moving average with gated attention), and further introduces multiple technical components to improve its capability and stability, including complex exponential moving average (CEMA), timestep normalization layer, normalized attention mechanism and pre-norm with two-hop residual configuration. In a controlled head-to-head comparison with Llama2, Megalodon achieves better efficiency than Transformer in the scale of 7 billion parameters and 2 trillion training tokens. Megalodon reaches a training loss of 1.70, landing mid-way between Llama2-7B (1.75) and 13B (1.67). Code: https://github.com/XuezheMax/megalodon9:T43a,While diffusion models excel at generating high-quality images, prior work reports a significant performance gap between diffusion and autoregressive (AR) methods in language modeling. In this work, we show that simple masked discrete diffusion is more performant than previously thought. We apply an effective training recipe that improves the performance of masked diffusion models and derive a simplified, Rao-Blackwellized objective that results in additional improvements. Our objective has a simple form -- it is a mixture of classical masked language modeling losses -- and can be used to train encoder-only language models that admit efficient samplers, including ones that can generate arbitrary lengths of text semi-autoregressively like a traditional language model. On language modeling benchmarks, a range of masked diffusion models trained with modern engineering practices achieves a new state-of-the-art among diffusion models, and approaches AR perplexity. We provide the code, along with a blog post and video tutorial on the project page: https://s-sahoo.com/mdlma:T441,Attention, as a core layer of the ubiquitous Transformer architecture, is the bottleneck for large language models and long-context applications. FlashAttention elaborated an approach to speed up attention on GPUs through minimizing memory reads/writes. However, it has yet to take advantage of new capabilities present in recent hardware, with FlashAttention-2 achieving only 35% utilization on the H100 GPU. We develop three main techniques to speed up attention on Hopper GPUs: exploiting asynchrony of the Tensor Cores and TMA to (1) overlap overall computation and data movement via warp-specialization and (2) interleave block-wise matmul and softmax operations, and (3) block quantization and incoherent processing that leverages hardware support for FP8 low-precision. We demonstrate that our method, FlashAttention-3, achieves speedup on H100 GPUs by 1.5-2.0$\times$ with FP16 reaching up to 740 TFLOPs/s (75% utilization), and with FP8 reaching close to 1.2 PFLOPs/s. We validate that FP8 FlashAttention-3 achieves 2.6$\times$ lower numerical error than a baseline FP8 attention.b:T40d,Tokenization is widely used in large language models because it significantly improves performance. However, tokenization imposes several disadvantages, such as performance biases, increased adversarial vulnerability, decreased character-level modeling performance, and increased modeling complexity. To address these disadvantages without sacrificing performance, we propose SpaceByte, a novel byte-level decoder architecture that closes the performance gap between byte-level and subword autoregressive language modeling. SpaceByte consists of a byte-level Transformer model, but with extra larger transformer blocks inserted in the middle of the layers. We find that performance is significantly improved by applying these larger blocks only after certain bytes, such as space characters, which typically denote word boundaries. Our experiments show that for a fixed training and inference compute budget, SpaceByte outperforms other byte-level architectures and roughly matches the performance of tokenized Transformer architectures.c:T465,We introduce a decoder-decoder architecture, YOCO, for large language models, which only caches key-value pairs once. It consists of two components, i.e., a cross-decoder stacked upon a self-decoder. The self-decoder efficiently encodes global key-value (KV) caches that are reused by the cross-decoder via cross-attention. The overall model behaves like a decoder-only Transformer, although YOCO only caches once. The design substantially reduces GPU memory demands, yet retains global attention capability. Additionally, the computation flow enables prefilling to early exit without changing the final output, thereby significantly speeding up the prefill stage. Experimental results demonstrate that YOCO achieves favorable performance compared to Transformer in various settings of scaling up model size and number of training tokens. We also extend YOCO to 1M context length with near-perfect needle retrieval accuracy. The profiling results show that YOCO improves inference memory, prefill latency, and throughput by orders of magnitude across context lengths and model sizes. Code is available at https://aka.ms/YOCO.d:T443,Recently, diffusion models have garnered significant interest in the field of text processing due to their many potential advantages compared to conventional autoregressive models.
In this work, we propose Diffusion-of-Thought (DoT),  a novel approach that integrates diffusion models with Chain-of-Thought, a well-established technique for improving the reasoning ability of autoregressive language models. In contrast to autoregressive language models that make decisions in a left-to-right, token-by-token manner, DoT allows reasoning steps to diffuse over time through a diffusion language model and offers greater flexibility in trading-off computation for reasoning performance. Our experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of DoT in multi-digit multiplication, boolean logic, and grade school math problems. In addition to that, DoT showcases promising self-correction abilities and benefits from existing reasoning-enhancing techniques like self-consistency decoding. Our findings contribute to the understanding and development of reasoning with diffusion language models.e:T5e2,Pretraining data selection has the potential to improve language model pretraining efficiency by utilizing higher-quality data from massive web data corpora. Current data selection methods, which rely on either hand-crafted rules or larger reference models, are conducted statically and do not capture the evolving data preferences during pretraining. In this paper, we introduce model-aware data selection with data influence models (MATES), where a data influence model continuously adapts to the evolving data preferences of the pretraining model and then selects the data most effective for the current pretraining progress. Specifically, we collect oracle data influence by locally probing the pretraining model and fine-tune a small data influence model to approximate it accurately. The data influence model then predicts data influence over the whole pretraining corpus and selects the most influential data for the next pretraining stage. Experiments of pretraining 410M and 1B models on the C4 dataset demonstrate that MATES significantly outperforms random data selection on extensive downstream tasks. It doubles the gains achieved by the state-of-the-art data selection approach that leverages larger reference models and reduces the total FLOPs required to reach certain performances by half. Further analyses validate the effectiveness of the locally probed oracle data influence and the approximation with data influence models. Our code is open-sourced at https://github.com/cxcscmu/MATES.f:T565,The Mixture of Experts (MoE) paradigm provides a powerful way to decompose dense layers into smaller, modular computations often more amenable to human interpretation, debugging, and editability. However, a major challenge lies in the computational cost of scaling the number of experts high enough to achieve fine-grained specialization. In this paper, we propose the Multilinear Mixture of Experts ($\mu$MoE) layer to address this, focusing on vision models. $\mu$MoE layers enable scalable expert specialization by performing an implicit computation on prohibitively large weight tensors entirely in factorized form. Consequently, $\mu$MoEs (1) avoid the restrictively high inference-time costs of dense MoEs, yet (2) do not inherit the training issues of the popular sparse MoEs' discrete (non-differentiable) expert routing. We present both qualitative and quantitative evidence that scaling $\mu$MoE layers when fine-tuning foundation models for vision tasks leads to more specialized experts at the class-level, further enabling manual bias correction in CelebA attribute classification. Finally, we show qualitative results demonstrating the expert specialism achieved when pre-training large GPT2 and MLP-Mixer models with parameter-matched $\mu$MoE blocks at every layer, maintaining comparable accuracy. Our code is available at: https://github.com/james-oldfield/muMoE.10:T61a,Learning from human preference data has emerged as the dominant paradigm for fine-tuning large language models (LLMs). The two most common families of techniques -- online reinforcement learning (RL) such as Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) and offline contrastive methods such as Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) -- were positioned as equivalent in prior work due to the fact that both have to start from the same offline preference dataset. To further expand our theoretical understanding of the similarities and differences between online and offline techniques for preference fine-tuning, we conduct a rigorous analysis through the lens of dataset coverage, a concept that captures how the training data covers the test distribution and is widely used in RL. We prove that a global coverage condition is both necessary and sufficient for offline contrastive methods to converge to the optimal policy, but a weaker partial coverage condition suffices for online RL methods. This separation provides one explanation of why online RL methods can perform better than offline methods, especially when the offline preference data is not diverse enough. Finally, motivated by our preceding theoretical observations, we derive a hybrid preference optimization (HyPO) algorithm that uses offline data for contrastive-based preference optimization and online data for KL regularization. Theoretically and empirically, we demonstrate that HyPO is more performant than its pure offline counterpart DPO, while still preserving its computation and memory efficiency.11:T51a,Large language models (LLMs) excel at few-shot in-context learning (ICL) -- learning from a few examples provided in context at inference, without any weight updates. Newly expanded context windows allow us to investigate ICL with hundreds or thousands of examples – the many-shot regime. Going from few-shot to many-shot, we observe significant performance gains across a wide variety of generative and discriminative tasks. While promising, many-shot ICL can be bottlenecked by the available amount of human-generated outputs. To mitigate this limitation, we explore two new settings: (1) "Reinforced ICL" that uses model-generated chain-of-thought rationales in place of human rationales, and (2) "Unsupervised ICL" where we remove rationales from the prompt altogether, and prompts the model only with domain-specific inputs. We find that both Reinforced and Unsupervised ICL can be quite effective in the many-shot regime, particularly on complex reasoning tasks. We demonstrate that, unlike few-shot learning, many-shot learning is effective at overriding pretraining biases, can learn high-dimensional functions with numerical inputs, and performs comparably to supervised fine-tuning. Finally, we reveal the limitations of next-token prediction loss as an indicator of downstream ICL performance.12:T611,In multilingual settings, non-Latin scripts and low-resource languages are usually disadvantaged in terms of language models’ utility, efficiency, and cost. Specifically, previous studies have reported multiple modeling biases that the current tokenization algorithms introduce to non-Latin script languages, the main one being over-segmentation. In this work, we propose MAGNET— multilingual adaptive gradient-based tokenization—to reduce over-segmentation via adaptive gradient-based subword tokenization. MAGNET learns to predict segment boundaries between byte tokens in a sequence via sub-modules within the model, which act as internal boundary predictors (tokenizers). Previous gradient-based tokenization methods aimed for uniform compression across sequences by integrating a single boundary predictor during training and optimizing it end-to-end through stochastic reparameterization alongside the next token prediction objective. However, this approach still results in over-segmentation for non-Latin script languages in multilingual settings. In contrast, MAGNET offers a customizable architecture where byte-level sequences are routed through language-script-specific predictors, each optimized for its respective language script. This modularity enforces equitable segmentation granularity across different language scripts compared to previous methods. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that in addition to reducing segmentation disparities, MAGNET also enables faster language modeling and improves downstream utility.13:T66b,While many contemporary large language models (LLMs) can process lengthy input, they still struggle to fully utilize information within the long context, known as the *lost-in-the-middle* challenge.
We hypothesize that it stems from insufficient explicit supervision during the long-context training, which fails to emphasize that any position in a long context can hold crucial information.
Based on this intuition, our study presents **information-intensive (IN2) training**, a purely data-driven solution to overcome lost-in-the-middle.
Specifically, IN2 training leverages a synthesized long-context question-answer dataset, where the answer requires (1) **fine-grained information awareness** on a short segment (~128 tokens) within a synthesized long context (4K-32K tokens), and (2) the **integration and reasoning** of information from two or more short segments.
Through applying this information-intensive training on Mistral-7B, we present **FILM-7B** (FIll-in-the-Middle).
To thoroughly assess the ability of FILM-7B for utilizing long contexts, we design three probing tasks that encompass various context styles (document, code, and structured-data context) and information retrieval patterns (forward, backward, and bi-directional retrieval).
The probing results demonstrate that FILM-7B can robustly retrieve information from different positions in its 32K context window.
Beyond these probing tasks, FILM-7B significantly improves the performance on real-world long-context tasks (e.g., 23.5->26.9 F1 score on NarrativeQA), while maintaining a comparable performance on short-context tasks (e.g., 59.3->59.2 accuracy on MMLU).14:T536,In the 1990s, the constant error carousel and gating were introduced as the central ideas of the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM). Since then, LSTMs have stood the test of time and contributed to numerous deep learning success stories, in particular they constituted the first Large Language Models (LLMs). However, the advent of the Transformer technology with parallelizable self-attention at its core marked the dawn of a new era, outpacing LSTMs at scale.  We now raise a simple question: How far do we get in language modeling when scaling LSTMs to billions of parameters, leveraging the latest techniques from modern LLMs, but mitigating known limitations of LSTMs? Firstly, we introduce exponential gating with appropriate normalization and stabilization techniques. Secondly, we modify the LSTM memory structure, obtaining: (i) sLSTM with a scalar memory, a scalar update, and new memory mixing, (ii) mLSTM that is fully parallelizable with a matrix memory and a covariance update rule. Integrating these LSTM extensions into residual block backbones yields xLSTM blocks that are then residually stacked into xLSTM architectures. Exponential gating and modified memory structures boost xLSTM capabilities to perform favorably when compared to state-of-the-art Transformers and State Space Models, both in performance and scaling.15:T5cd,Transformer architectures have become a dominant paradigm for domains like language modeling but suffer in many inference settings due to their quadratic-time self-attention. Recently proposed subquadratic architectures, such as Mamba, have shown promise, but have been pretrained with substantially less computational resources than the strongest Transformer models. In this work, we present a method that is able to distill a pretrained Transformer architecture into alternative architectures such as state space models (SSMs). The key idea to our approach is that we can view both Transformers and SSMs as applying different forms of mixing matrices over the token sequences. We can thus progressively distill the Transformer architecture by matching different degrees of granularity in the SSM: first matching the mixing matrices themselves, then the hidden units at each block, and finally the end-to-end predictions. Our method, called MOHAWK, is able to distill a Mamba-2 variant based on the Phi-1.5 architecture (Phi-Mamba) using only 3B tokens and a hybrid version (Hybrid Phi-Mamba) using 5B tokens. Despite using less than 1% of the training data typically used to train models from scratch, Phi-Mamba boasts substantially stronger performance compared to all past open-source non-Transformer models. MOHAWK allows models like SSMs to leverage computational resources invested in training Transformer-based architectures, highlighting a new avenue for building such models.16:T4a6,The core approach is to first identify the family of parameterizations that preserve feature learning, and then analyze their training dynamics with dynamical mean field theory. This is not a new architecture. It is a limit analysis of standard multi-head attention under carefully chosen scalings. The first step is a consistency filter: forward activations, gradients, and attention updates must all remain non-degenerate as width or depth grows. That rules out parameterizations where attention logits, residual streams, or parameter updates either vanish or blow up. The second step studies three limits separately—infinite key/query dimension, infinite number of heads, and infinite depth—and shows that they do not collapse to one universal description. Different limits and different attention scalings lead to different closed-form statistical dynamics and different feature evolution. The design works because it keeps the scale-sensitive part of transformers, namely softmax attention and multi-head aggregation, explicit instead of assuming all large-width limits are equivalent. The trade-off is that the theory becomes more case-dependent than standard MLP or NTK analyses.17:T587,Selecting high-quality data for pre-training is crucial in shaping the downstream task performance of language models. A major challenge lies in identifying this optimal subset, a problem generally considered intractable, thus necessitating scalable and effective heuristics. In this work, we propose a data selection method, CoLoR-Filter (Conditional Loss Reduction Filtering), which leverages an empirical Bayes-inspired approach to derive a simple and computationally efficient selection criterion based on the relative loss values of two auxiliary models. In addition to the modeling rationale, we evaluate CoLoR-Filter empirically on two language modeling tasks: (1) selecting data from C4 for domain adaptation to evaluation on Books and (2) selecting data from C4 for a suite of downstream multiple-choice question answering tasks. We demonstrate favorable scaling both as we subselect more aggressively and using small auxiliary models to select data for large target models. As one headline result, CoLoR-Filter data selected using a pair of 150m parameter auxiliary models can train a 1.2b parameter target model to match a 1.2b parameter model trained on 25b randomly selected tokens with 25x less data for Books and 11x less data for the downstream tasks. Code: https://github.com/davidbrandfonbrener/color-filter-olmo Filtered data: https://huggingface.co/datasets/davidbrandfonbrener/color-filtered-c418:T56c,Key-value (KV) caching plays an essential role in accelerating decoding for transformer-based autoregressive large language models (LLMs). However, the amount of memory required to store the KV cache can become prohibitive at long sequence lengths and large batch sizes. Since the invention of the transformer, two of the most effective interventions discovered for reducing the size of the KV cache have been Multi-Query Attention (MQA) and its generalization, Grouped-Query Attention (GQA). MQA and GQA both modify the design of the attention block so that multiple query heads can share a single key/value head, reducing the number of distinct key/value heads by a large factor while only minimally degrading accuracy. In this paper, we show that it is possible to take Multi-Query Attention a step further by also sharing key and value heads between adjacent layers, yielding a new attention design we call Cross-Layer Attention (CLA). With CLA, we find that it is possible to reduce the size of the KV cache by another 2x while maintaining nearly the same accuracy as unmodified MQA. In experiments training 1B- and 3B-parameter models from scratch, we demonstrate that CLA provides a Pareto improvement over the memory/accuracy tradeoffs which are possible with traditional MQA, enabling inference with longer sequence lengths and larger batch sizes than would otherwise be possible19:T63a,In-context learning (ICL) is a cornerstone of large language model (LLM) functionality, yet its theoretical foundations remain elusive due to the complexity of transformer architectures. In particular, most existing work only theoretically explains how the attention mechanism facilitates ICL under certain data models. It remains unclear how the other building blocks of the transformer contribute to ICL. To address this question, we study how a two-attention-layer transformer is trained to perform ICL on $n$-gram Markov chain data, where each token in the Markov chain statistically depends on the previous n tokens. 
We analyze a sophisticated transformer model featuring relative positional embedding, multi-head softmax attention,  and a feed-forward layer with normalization. 
We prove that the gradient flow with respect to a cross-entropy ICL loss converges to a limiting model that performs a generalized version of the "induction head" mechanism with a learned feature, resulting from the congruous contribution of all the building blocks. 
Specifically, the first attention layer acts as a copier, copying past tokens within a given window to each position, and the feed-forward network with normalization acts as a selector that generates a feature vector by only looking at informationally relevant parents from the window. 
Finally, the second attention layer is a classifier that
compares these features with the feature at the output position, and uses the resulting similarity scores to generate the desired output. Our theory is further validated by simulation experiments.1a:T6a0,In recent times, Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have been trained under two predominant paradigms. Generative training has enabled Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) to tackle various complex tasks, yet issues such as hallucinations and weak object discrimination persist. Discriminative training, exemplified by models like CLIP, excels in zero-shot image-text classification and retrieval, yet struggles with complex scenarios requiring fine-grained semantic differentiation. This paper addresses these challenges by proposing a unified approach that integrates the strengths of both paradigms. Considering interleaved image-text sequences as the general format of input samples, we introduce a structure-induced training strategy that imposes semantic relationships between input samples and the MLLM’s hidden state. This approach enhances the MLLM’s ability to capture global semantics and distinguish fine-grained semantics. By leveraging dynamic sequence alignment within the Dynamic Time Warping framework and integrating a novel kernel for fine-grained semantic differentiation, our method effectively balances generative and discriminative tasks. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, achieving state-of-the-art results in multiple generative tasks, especially those requiring cognitive and discrimination abilities. Additionally, our method surpasses discriminative benchmarks in interleaved and fine-grained retrieval tasks. By employing a retrieval-augmented generation strategy, our approach further enhances performance in some generative tasks within one model, offering a promising direction for future research in vision-language modeling.1b:T4e9,Previous work on Universal Transformers (UTs) has demonstrated the importance of parameter sharing across layers. By allowing recurrence in depth, UTs have advantages over standard Transformers in learning compositional generalizations, but layer-sharing comes with a practical limitation of parameter-compute ratio: it drastically reduces the parameter count compared to the non-shared model with the same dimensionality. Naively scaling up the layer size to compensate for the loss of parameters makes its computational resource requirements prohibitive. In practice, no previous work has succeeded in proposing a shared-layer Transformer design that is competitive in parameter count-dominated tasks such as language modeling. Here we propose MoEUT (pronounced "moot"), an effective mixture-of-experts (MoE)-based shared-layer Transformer architecture, which combines several recent advances in MoEs for both feedforward and attention layers of standard Transformers together with novel layer-normalization and grouping schemes that are specific and crucial to UTs. The resulting UT model, for the first time, slightly outperforms standard Transformers on language modeling tasks such as BLiMP and PIQA, while using significantly less compute and memory.1c:T45e,Despite many recent works on Mixture of Experts (MoEs) for resource-efficient Transformer language models, existing methods mostly focus on MoEs for feedforward layers. Previous attempts at extending MoE to the self-attention layer fail to match the performance of the parameter-matched baseline. Our novel SwitchHead is an effective MoE method for the attention layer that successfully reduces both the compute and memory requirements, achieving wall-clock speedup, while matching the language modeling performance of the baseline Transformer. Our novel MoE mechanism allows SwitchHead to compute up to 8 times fewer attention matrices than the standard Transformer. SwitchHead can also be combined with MoE feedforward layers, resulting in fully-MoE "SwitchAll" Transformers. For our 262M parameter model trained on C4, SwitchHead matches the perplexity of standard models with only 44% compute and 27% memory usage. Zero-shot experiments on downstream tasks confirm the performance of SwitchHead, e.g., achieving more than 3.5% absolute improvements on BliMP compared to the baseline with an equal compute resource.1d:T65d,Generative modeling over discrete data has recently seen numerous success stories, with applications spanning language modeling, biological sequence design, and graph-structured molecular data. The predominant generative modeling paradigm for discrete data is still autoregressive, with more recent alternatives based on diffusion or flow-matching falling short of their impressive performance in continuous data settings, such as image or video generation. In this work, we introduce Fisher-Flow, a novel flow-matching model for discrete data. Fisher-Flow takes a manifestly geometric perspective
by considering categorical distributions over discrete data as points residing on a statistical manifold equipped with its natural Riemannian metric: the \emph{Fisher-Rao metric}. As a result, we demonstrate discrete data itself can be continuously reparameterised to points on the positive orthant of the $d$-hypersphere $\mathbb{S}^d_+$, 
which allows us to define flows that map any source distribution to target in a principled manner by transporting mass along (closed-form) geodesics of $\mathbb{S}^d_+$. Furthermore, the learned flows in Fisher-Flow can be further bootstrapped by leveraging Riemannian optimal transport leading to improved training dynamics. We prove that the gradient flow induced by Fisher-FLow is optimal in reducing the forward KL divergence. We evaluate Fisher-Flow on an array of synthetic and diverse real-world benchmarks, including designing DNA Promoter, and DNA Enhancer sequences. Empirically, we find that Fisher-Flow improves over prior diffusion and flow-matching models on these benchmarks.1e:T749,LLMs are computationally expensive to pre-train due to their large scale. Model growth emerges as a promising approach by leveraging smaller models to accelerate the training of larger ones. However, the viability of these model growth methods in efficient LLM pre-training remains underexplored. This work identifies three critical $\underline{\textit{O}}$bstacles: ($\textit{O}$1) lack of comprehensive evaluation, ($\textit{O}$2) untested viability for scaling, and ($\textit{O}$3) lack of empirical guidelines. To tackle $\textit{O}$1, we summarize existing approaches into four atomic growth operators and systematically evaluate them in a standardized LLM pre-training setting. Our findings reveal that a depthwise stacking operator, called $G_{\text{stack}}$, exhibits remarkable acceleration in training, leading to decreased loss and improved overall performance on eight standard NLP benchmarks compared to strong baselines. Motivated by these promising results, we conduct extensive experiments to delve deeper into $G_{\text{stack}}$ to address $\textit{O}$2 and $\textit{O}$3. For $\textit{O}$2 (untested scalability), our study shows that $G_{\text{stack}}$ is scalable and consistently performs well, with experiments up to 7B LLMs after growth and pre-training LLMs with 750B tokens. For example, compared to a conventionally trained 7B model using 300B tokens, our $G_{\text{stack}}$ model converges to the same loss with 194B tokens, resulting in a 54.6\% speedup. We further address $\textit{O}$3 (lack of empirical guidelines) by formalizing guidelines to determine growth timing and growth factor for $G_{\text{stack}}$, making it practical in general LLM pre-training. We also provide in-depth discussions and comprehensive ablation studies of $G_{\text{stack}}$. Our code and pre-trained model are available at https://llm-stacking.github.io.1f:T5f7,A key goal in mechanistic interpretability is circuit analysis: finding sparse subgraphs of models corresponding to specific behaviors or capabilities. However, MLP sublayers make fine-grained circuit analysis on transformer-based language models difficult. In particular, interpretable features -- such as those found by sparse autoencoders (SAEs) -- are typically linear combinations of extremely many neurons, each with its own nonlinearity to account for. Circuit analysis in this setting thus either yields intractably large circuits or fails to disentangle local and global behavior. To address this we explore transcoders, which seek to faithfully approximate a densely activating MLP layer with a wider, sparsely-activating MLP layer. We introduce a novel method for using transcoders to perform weights-based circuit analysis through MLP sublayers. The resulting circuits neatly factorize into input-dependent and input-invariant terms. We then successfully train transcoders on language models with 120M, 410M, and 1.4B parameters, and find them to perform at least on par with SAEs in terms of sparsity, faithfulness, and human-interpretability. Finally, we apply transcoders to reverse-engineer unknown circuits in the model, and we obtain novel insights regarding the"greater-than circuit"in GPT2-small. Our results suggest that transcoders can prove effective in decomposing model computations involving MLPs into interpretable circuits. Code is available at https://github.com/jacobdunefsky/transcoder_circuits/.20:T5d8,We introduce the Block Transformer which adopts hierarchical global-to-local modeling to autoregressive transformers to mitigate the inference bottlenecks associated with self-attention. Self-attention requires the key-value (KV) cache of all previous sequences to be retrieved from memory at every decoding step to retrieve context information, leading to two primary bottlenecks during batch inference. First, there is a significant delay in obtaining the first token, as the information of the entire prompt must first be processed to prefill the KV cache. Second, computation of subsequent tokens is bottlenecked by the high memory I/O demand of fetching the entire KV cache, which grows linearly with sequence length, incurring quadratic memory reads overall. We design the Block Transformer to strategically mitigate these costs, by incorporating coarsity and locality into an integrated global-to-local architecture. At the lower layers, we aggregate tokens into fixed size blocks to apply attention across the entire sequence at coarse-grained detail, to capture the global context while minimizing KV cache overhead. At upper layers, we apply attention within each block to decode individual tokens, to model fine-grained details with a lightweight local KV cache. We pretrain vanilla and Block Transformers from scratch and demonstrate that Block Transformers reach 10--20x inference throughput compared to vanilla transformers with equivalent perplexity and zero-shot task performance.21:T63a,LLMs are seeing growing use for applications which require large context windows, and with these large context windows KV cache activations surface as the dominant contributor to memory consumption during inference. Quantization is a promising approach for compressing KV cache activations; however, existing solutions fail to represent activations accurately in sub-4-bit precision. Our work, KVQuant, facilitates low precision KV cache quantization by incorporating several novel methods: (i) Per-Channel Key Quantization, where we adjust the dimension along which we quantize the Key activations to better match the distribution; (ii) Pre-RoPE Key Quantization, where we quantize Key activations before the rotary positional embedding to mitigate its impact on quantization; (iii) Non-Uniform KV Cache Quantization, where we derive per-layer sensitivity-weighted non-uniform datatypes that better represent the distributions; and (iv) Per-Vector Dense-and-Sparse Quantization, where we isolate outliers separately for each vector to minimize skews in quantization ranges. By applying our method to the LLaMA, Llama-2, Llama-3, and Mistral models, we achieve < 0.1 perplexity degradation with 3-bit quantization on both Wikitext-2 and C4, outperforming existing approaches. Our method enables serving LLaMA-7B with a context length of up to 1 million on a single A100-80GB GPU and up to 10 million on an 8-GPU system. We develop custom CUDA kernels for KVQuant, showing that we can achieve up to ~1.7x speedups, compared to baseline fp16 matrix-vector multiplications, for the LLaMA-7B model.22:T51f,Learning from preference feedback has emerged as an essential step for improving the generation quality and performance of modern language models (LMs). Despite its widespread use, the way preference-based learning is applied varies wildly, with differing data, learning algorithms, and evaluations used, making disentangling the impact of each aspect difficult. In this work, we identify four core aspects of preference-based learning: preference data, learning algorithm, reward model, and policy training prompts, systematically investigate the impact of these components on downstream model performance, and suggest a recipe for strong learning for preference feedback. Our findings indicate that all aspects are important for performance, with better preference data leading to the largest improvements, followed by the choice of learning algorithm, the use of improved reward models, and finally the use of additional unlabeled prompts for policy training. Notably, PPO outperforms DPO by up to 2.5% in math and 1.2% in general domains. High-quality preference data leads to improvements of up to 8% in instruction following and truthfulness. Despite significant gains of up to 5% in mathematical evaluation when scaling up reward models, we surprisingly observe marginal improvements in other categories.23:T494,Safety fine-tuning helps align Large Language Models (LLMs) with human preferences for their safe deployment. To better understand the underlying factors that make models safe via safety fine-tuning, we design a synthetic data generation framework that captures salient aspects of an unsafe input by modeling the interaction between the task the model is asked to perform (e.g., “design”) versus the specific concepts the task is asked to be performed upon (e.g., a “cycle” vs. a “bomb”). Using this, we investigate three well-known safety fine-tuning methods—supervised safety fine-tuning, direct preference optimization, and unlearning—and provide significant evidence demonstrating that these methods minimally transform MLP weights to specifically align unsafe inputs into its weights’ null space. This yields a clustering of inputs based on whether the model deems them safe or not. Correspondingly, when an adversarial input (e.g., a jailbreak) is provided, its activations are closer to safer samples, leading to the model processing such an input as if it were safe. Code is available at https://github.com/fiveai/understanding_safety_finetuning.24:T6c5,The computational challenges of Large Language Model (LLM) inference remain a significant barrier to their widespread deployment, especially as prompt lengths continue to increase. Due to the quadratic complexity of the attention computation, it takes 30 minutes for an 8B LLM to process a prompt of 1M tokens (i.e., the pre-filling stage) on a single A100 GPU. Existing methods for speeding up prefilling often fail to maintain acceptable accuracy or efficiency when applied to long-context LLMs. To address this gap, we introduce MInference (Milliontokens Inference), a sparse calculation method designed to accelerate pre-filling of long-sequence processing. Specifically, we identify three unique patterns in long-context attention matrices-the A-shape, Vertical-Slash, and Block-Sparse-that can be leveraged for efficient sparse computation on GPUs. We determine the optimal pattern for each attention head offline and dynamically build sparse
indices based on the assigned pattern during inference. With the pattern and sparse indices, we perform efficient sparse attention calculations via our optimized GPU kernels to significantly reduce the latency in the pre-filling stage of longcontext LLMs. Our proposed technique can be directly applied to existing LLMs without any modifications to the pre-training setup or additional fine-tuning. By
evaluating on a wide range of downstream tasks, including InfiniteBench, RULER, PG-19, and Needle In A Haystack, and models including LLaMA-3-1M, GLM-4-1M, Yi-200K, Phi-3-128K, and Qwen2-128K, we demonstrate that MInference effectively reduces inference latency by up to 10x for pre-filling on an A100, while maintaining accuracy. Our code is available at https://aka.ms/MInference.25:T548,Recent work shows promising results in expanding the capabilities of large language models (LLM) to directly understand and synthesize speech. However, an LLM-based strategy for modeling spoken dialogs remains elusive, calling for further investigation. This paper introduces an extensive speech-text LLM framework, the Unified Spoken Dialog Model (USDM), designed to generate coherent spoken responses with naturally occurring prosodic features relevant to the given input speech without relying on explicit automatic speech recognition (ASR) or text-to-speech (TTS) systems. We have verified the inclusion of prosody in speech tokens that predominantly contain semantic information and have used this foundation to construct a prosody-infused speech-text model. Additionally, we propose a generalized speech-text pretraining scheme that enhances the capture of cross-modal semantics. To construct USDM, we fine-tune our speech-text model on spoken dialog data using a multi-step spoken dialog template that stimulates the chain-of-reasoning capabilities exhibited by the underlying LLM. Automatic and human evaluations on the DailyTalk dataset demonstrate that our approach effectively generates natural-sounding spoken responses, surpassing previous and cascaded baselines. Our code and checkpoints are available at https://github.com/naver-ai/usdm.26:T634,Today's best language models still struggle with "hallucinations", factually incorrect generations, which impede their ability to reliably retrieve information seen during training. The *reversal curse*, where models cannot recall information when probed in a different order than was encountered during training, exemplifies limitations in information retrieval. 
To better understand these limitations, we reframe the reversal curse as a *factorization curse* --- a failure of models to learn the same joint distribution under different factorizations.
We more closely simulate finetuning workflows which train pretrained models on specialized knowledge by introducing
*WikiReversal*, a realistic testbed based on Wikipedia knowledge graphs. Through a series of controlled experiments with increasing levels of realism, including non-reciprocal relations, we find that reliable information retrieval is an inherent failure of the next-token prediction objective used in popular large language models. Moreover, we demonstrate reliable information retrieval cannot be solved with scale, reversed tokens, or even naive bidirectional-attention training. Consequently, various approaches to finetuning on specialized data would necessarily provide mixed results on downstream tasks, unless the model has already seen the right sequence of tokens. 
Across five tasks of varying levels of complexity, our results uncover a promising path forward: factorization-agnostic objectives can significantly mitigate the reversal curse and hint at improved knowledge storage and planning capabilities.27:T660,Large Language Models (LLMs) have made remarkable progress in processing extensive contexts, with the Key-Value (KV) cache playing a vital role in enhancing their performance. However, the growth of the KV cache in response to increasing input length poses challenges to memory and time efficiency. To address this problem, this paper introduces SnapKV, an innovative and fine-tuning-free approach that efficiently minimizes KV cache size while still delivering comparable performance in real-world applications. We discover that each attention head in the model consistently focuses on specific prompt attention features during generation. Meanwhile, this robust pattern can be obtained from an 'observation' window located at the end of the prompts. Drawing on this insight, SnapKV automatically compresses KV caches by selecting clustered important KV positions for each attention head. Our approach significantly reduces the growing computational overhead and memory footprint when processing long input sequences. Specifically, SnapKV achieves a consistent decoding speed with a 3.6x increase in generation speed and an 8.2x enhancement in memory efficiency compared to the baseline when processing inputs of 16K tokens. At the same time, it maintains comparable performance to the baseline models across 16 long sequence datasets. Moreover, SnapKV can process up to 380K context tokens on a single A100-80GB GPU using HuggingFace implementation with minor changes, exhibiting only a negligible accuracy drop in the Needle-in-a-Haystack test. Further comprehensive studies suggest SnapKV's potential for practical applications.28:T475,Conventional wisdom holds that autoregressive models for image generation are typically accompanied by vector-quantized tokens. We observe that while a discrete-valued space can facilitate representing a categorical distribution, it is not a necessity for autoregressive modeling. In this work, we propose to model the per-token probability distribution using a diffusion procedure, which allows us to apply autoregressive models in a continuous-valued space. Rather than using categorical cross-entropy loss, we define a Diffusion Loss function to model the per-token probability. This approach eliminates the need for discrete-valued tokenizers. We evaluate its effectiveness across a wide range of cases, including standard autoregressive models and generalized masked autoregressive (MAR) variants. By removing vector quantization, our image generator achieves strong results while enjoying the speed advantage of sequence modeling. We hope this work will motivate the use of autoregressive generation in other continuous-valued domains and applications. Code is available at [https://github.com/LTH14/mar](https://github.com/LTH14/mar).29:T553,Previous language model pre-training methods have uniformly applied a next-token prediction loss to all training tokens. Challenging this norm, we posit that ''Not all tokens in a corpus are equally important for language model training''. Our initial analysis examines token-level training dynamics of language model, revealing distinct loss patterns for different tokens. Leveraging these insights, we introduce a new language model called Rho-1. Unlike traditional LMs that learn to predict every next token in a corpus, Rho-1 employs Selective Language Modeling (SLM), which selectively trains on useful tokens that aligned with the desired distribution. This approach involves scoring training tokens using a reference model, and then training the language model with a focused loss on tokens with higher scores. When continual continual pretraining on 15B OpenWebMath corpus, Rho-1 yields an absolute improvement in few-shot accuracy of up to 30% in 9 math tasks. After fine-tuning, Rho-1-1B and 7B achieved state-of-the-art results of 40.6% and 51.8% on MATH dataset, respectively - matching DeepSeekMath with only 3% of the pretraining tokens. Furthermore, when continual pretraining on 80B general tokens, Rho-1 achieves 6.8% average enhancement across 15 diverse tasks, increasing both data efficiency and performance of the language model pre-training.2a:T5f8,Pre-trained language models have been proven to possess strong base capabilities, which not only excel in in-distribution language modeling but also show powerful abilities in out-of-distribution language modeling, transfer learning and few-shot learning. Unlike existing work focusing on the influence of scale on base capabilities, our work examines the influence of architecture on those. Specifically, our concern is: How does architecture influence the base capabilities of pre-trained language models? In this work, we attempt to explain and reverse the decline in base capabilities caused by the architecture of FFN-Wider Transformers, seeking to provide some insights. Through analysis, we found the contribution ratio of Multi-Head Attention (a combination function) to pre-trained language modeling is a key factor affecting base capabilities. FFN-Wider Transformers reduce the contribution ratio of this combination function, leading to a decline in base capabilities. We confirmed this by experiments and proposed Combination Enhanced Architecture (CEA) to address the decline in base capabilities of such models. Significantly, we extended our explanation and CEA to Mixture of Experts (MoE) Transformers. We successfully achieved significant improvements in base capabilities on a 14B parameter MoE model, demonstrating the practical application value of our work. This also indicates that our analysis has a certain guiding significance for architecture analysis, architecture improvement and architecture design.2b:T439,Evaluations of language models (LMs) commonly report perplexity on monolithic data held out from training. Implicitly or explicitly, this data is composed of domains--varying distributions of language. We introduce Perplexity Analysis for Language Model Assessment (Paloma), a benchmark to measure LM fit to 546 English and code domains, instead of assuming perplexity on one distribution extrapolates to others. We include two new datasets of the top 100 subreddits (e.g., r/depression on Reddit) and programming languages (e.g., Java on GitHub), both sources common in contemporary LMs. With our benchmark, we release 6 baseline 1B LMs carefully controlled to provide fair comparisons about which pretraining corpus is best and code for others to apply those controls to their own experiments. Our case studies demonstrate how the fine-grained results from Paloma surface findings such as that models pretrained without data beyond Common Crawl exhibit anomalous gaps in LM fit to many domains or that loss is dominated by the most frequently occurring strings in the vocabulary.2c:T6a5,The softmax gating function is arguably the most popular choice in mixture of experts modeling. Despite its widespread use in practice, the softmax gating may lead to unnecessary competition among experts, potentially causing the undesirable phenomenon of representation collapse due to its inherent structure. In response, the sigmoid gating function has been recently proposed as an alternative and has been demonstrated empirically to achieve superior performance. However, a rigorous examination of the sigmoid gating function is lacking in current literature. In this paper, we verify theoretically that the sigmoid gating, in fact, enjoys a higher sample efficiency than the softmax gating for the statistical task of expert estimation. Towards that goal, we consider a regression framework in which the unknown regression function is modeled as a mixture of experts, and study the rates of convergence of the least squares estimator under the over-specified case in which the number of fitted experts is larger than the true value. We show that two gating regimes naturally arise and, in each of them, we formulate an identifiability condition for the expert functions and derive the corresponding convergence rates. In both cases, we find that experts formulated as feed-forward networks with commonly used activation such as $\mathrm{ReLU}$ and $\mathrm{GELU}$ enjoy faster convergence rates under the sigmoid gating than those under softmax gating. Furthermore, given the same choice of experts, we demonstrate that the sigmoid gating function requires a smaller sample size than its softmax counterpart to attain the same error of expert estimation and, therefore, is more sample efficient.2d:T6d1,Larger transformer models perform better on various downstream tasks but require more cost to scale up the model size. To efficiently enlarge models, the Mixture-of-Expert (MoE) architecture is widely adopted, which consists of a gate network and a series of experts and keep the training cost constant by routing the input data to a fixed number of experts instead of all.
In existing large-scale MoE training systems, experts would be distributed among different GPUs for parallelization, and thus input data requires additional all-to-all communication to access the target expert and conduct corresponding computation. 
However, upon evaluating the training process of three mainstream MoE models on commonly used GPU clusters, we found that the all-to-all communication ratio averaged around 45\%, which significantly hinders the training efficiency and scalability of MoE models.

In this paper, we propose LSH-MoE, a communication-efficient MoE training framework using locality-sensitive hashing (LSH). 
We first present the problems of scaling MoE training in existing systems and highlight the potential of exploiting token similarity to facilitate data compression.
Then, we introduce an efficient LSH-based compression technique, which utilizes the cross-polytope hashing for rapid clustering and implements a residual-based error compensation scheme to alleviate the adverse impact of compression. 
To verify the effectiveness of our methods, we conduct experiments on both language models (e.g., RoBERTa, GPT, and T5) and vision models (e.g., Swin) for both pre-training and fine-tuning tasks. The results demonstrate that our method substantially outperforms its counterparts across different tasks by 1.28-2.2$\times$ of speedup.2e:T736,Large language models (LLMs) are commonly trained on datasets consisting of fixed-length token sequences. These datasets are created by randomly concatenating documents of various lengths and then chunking them into sequences of a predetermined target length (concat-and-chunk). Recent attention implementations mask cross-document attention, reducing the effective length of a chunk of tokens. Additionally, training on long sequences becomes computationally prohibitive due to the quadratic cost of attention. In this study, we introduce dataset decomposition, a novel variable sequence length training technique, to tackle these challenges. We decompose a dataset into a union of buckets, each containing sequences of the same size extracted from a unique document. During training, we use variable sequence length and batch-size, sampling simultaneously from all buckets with a curriculum. In contrast to the concat-and-chunk baseline, which incurs a fixed attention cost at every step of training, our proposed method incurs a computational cost proportional to the actual document lengths at each step, resulting in significant savings in training time. We train an 8k context-length 1B model at the same cost as a 2k context-length model trained with the baseline approach. Experiments on a web-scale corpus demonstrate that our approach significantly enhances performance on standard language evaluations and long-context benchmarks, reaching target accuracy with up to 6x faster training compared to the baseline. Our method not only enables efficient pretraining on long sequences but also scales effectively with dataset size. Lastly, we shed light on a critical yet less studied aspect of training large language models: the distribution and curriculum of sequence lengths, which results in a non-negligible difference in performance.2f:T53b,Understanding how language model performance varies with scale is critical to benchmark and algorithm development. Scaling laws are one approach to building this understanding, but the requirement of training models across many different scales has limited their use. We propose an alternative, observational approach that bypasses model training and instead builds scaling laws from ~100 publically available models. Building a single scaling law from multiple model families is challenging due to large variations in their training compute efficiencies and capabilities. However, we show that these variations are consistent with a simple, generalized scaling law where language model performance is a function of a low-dimensional capability space, and model families only vary in their efficiency in converting training compute to capabilities. Using this approach, we show the surprising predictability of complex scaling phenomena: we show that several emergent phenomena follow a smooth, sigmoidal behavior and are predictable from small models; we show that the agent performance of models such as GPT-4 can be precisely predicted from simpler non-agentic benchmarks; and we show how to predict the impact of post-training interventions like Chain-of-Thought and Self-Consistency as language model capabilities continue to improve.30:T69c,Given the increasing scale of model sizes, novel training strategies like gradual stacking [Gong et al., 2019, Reddi et al., 2023] have garnered interest. Stacking enables efficient training by gradually growing the depth of a model in stages and using layers from a smaller model in an earlier stage to initialize the next stage. Although efficient for training, the model biases induced by such growing approaches are largely unexplored. In this work, we examine this fundamental aspect of gradual stacking, going beyond its efficiency benefits. We propose a variant of gradual stacking called MIDAS that can speed up language model training by up to 40%. Furthermore we discover an intriguing phenomenon: MIDAS is not only training-efficient but surprisingly also has an inductive bias towards improving downstream tasks, especially tasks that require reasoning abilities like reading comprehension and math problems, despite having similar or slightly worse perplexity compared to baseline training. To further analyze this inductive bias, we construct reasoning primitives -- simple synthetic tasks that are building blocks for reasoning -- and find that a model pretrained with stacking is significantly better than standard pretraining on these primitives, with and without fine-tuning. This provides stronger and more robust evidence for this inductive bias towards reasoning. These findings of training efficiency and inductive bias towards reasoning are verified at 1B, 2B and 8B parameter language models. Finally, we conjecture the underlying reason for this inductive bias by exploring the connection of stacking to looped models and provide strong supporting empirical analysis.31:T5e9,Scaling laws with respect to the amount of training data and the number of parameters allow us to predict the cost-benefit trade-offs of pretraining language models (LMs) in different configurations. In this paper, we consider another dimension of scaling: the amount of data available at inference time. Specifically, we find that increasing the size of the datastore used by a retrieval-based LM monotonically improves language modeling and several downstream tasks without obvious saturation, such that a smaller model augmented with a large datastore outperforms a larger LM-only model on knowledge-intensive tasks. By plotting compute-optimal scaling curves with varied datastore, model, and pretraining data sizes, we show that using larger datastores can significantly improve model performance for the same training compute budget. We carry out our study by constructing a 1.4 trillion-token datastore named MassiveDS, which is the largest and the most diverse open-sourced datastore for retrieval-based LMs to date, and designing an efficient pipeline for studying datastore scaling in an accessible manner. Finally, we analyze the effect of improving the retriever, datastore quality filtering, and other design choices on our observed scaling trends. Overall, our results show that datastore size should be considered as an integral part of LM efficiency and performance trade-offs. To facilitate future research, we open-source our datastore and code at https://github.com/RulinShao/retrieval-scaling.32:T54c,Second-order optimizers, maintaining a matrix termed a preconditioner, are superior to first-order optimizers in both theory and practice.
The states forming the preconditioner and its inverse root restrict the maximum size of models trained by second-order optimizers. To address this, compressing 32-bit optimizer states to lower bitwidths has shown promise in reducing memory usage. However, current approaches only pertain to first-order optimizers. In this paper, we propose the first 4-bit second-order optimizers, exemplified by 4-bit Shampoo, maintaining performance similar to that of 32-bit ones. We show that quantizing the eigenvector matrix of the preconditioner in 4-bit Shampoo is remarkably better than quantizing the preconditioner itself both theoretically and experimentally. By rectifying the orthogonality of the quantized eigenvector matrix, we enhance the approximation of the preconditioner's eigenvector matrix, which also benefits the computation of its inverse 4-th root. Besides, we find that linear square quantization slightly outperforms dynamic tree quantization when quantizing second-order optimizer states. Evaluation on various networks for image classification and natural language modeling demonstrates that our 4-bit Shampoo achieves comparable performance to its 32-bit counterpart while being more memory-efficient.33:T676,State-of-the-art results in large language models (LLMs) often rely on scale, which
becomes computationally expensive. This has sparked a research agenda to reduce
these models’ parameter counts and computational costs without significantly
impacting their performance. Our study focuses on transformer-based LLMs,
specifically targeting the computationally intensive feedforward networks (FFNs),
which are less studied than attention blocks. We consider three structured linear
parameterizations of the FFN using efficient low-rank and block-diagonal matrices.
In contrast to many previous works that examined these approximations, our study
i) explores these structures from a training-from-scratch perspective, ii) scales up
to 1.3B parameters, and iii) is conducted within recent Transformer-based LLMs
rather than convolutional architectures. We demonstrate that these structures can
lead to actual computational gains in various scenarios, including online decoding
when using a pre-merge technique. Additionally, we propose a novel training
regime, called self-guided training, aimed at improving the poor training dynamics
that these approximations exhibit when used from initialization. Interestingly,
the scaling performance of structured matrices is explored, revealing steeper
curves in scaling training FLOPs, along with a favorable scaling trend in the
overtraining regime. Specifically, we show that wide and structured networks
can utilize training FLOPs more efficiently, with fewer parameters and lower
loss than dense models at their optimal trade-off. Our code is available at
https://github.com/CLAIRE-Labo/StructuredFFN/tree/main.34:T5ad,The majority of language model training builds on imitation learning. It covers pretraining, supervised fine-tuning, and affects the starting conditions for reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). The simplicity and scalability of maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) for next token prediction led to its role as predominant paradigm. However, the broader field of imitation learning can more effectively utilize the sequential structure underlying autoregressive generation. We focus on investigating the inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) perspective to imitation, extracting rewards and directly optimizing sequences instead of individual token likelihoods and evaluate its benefits for fine-tuning large language models. We provide a new angle, reformulating inverse soft-Q-learning as a temporal difference regularized extension of MLE. This creates a principled connection between MLE and IRL and allows trading off added complexity with increased performance and diversity of generations in the supervised fine-tuning (SFT) setting. We find clear advantages for IRL-based imitation, in particular for retaining diversity while maximizing task performance, rendering IRL a strong alternative on fixed SFT datasets even without online data generation. Our analysis of IRL-extracted reward functions further indicates benefits for more robust reward functions via tighter integration of supervised and preference-based LLM post-training.35:T494,Offline preference optimization is a key method for enhancing and controlling the quality of Large Language Model (LLM) outputs. Typically, preference optimization is approached as an offline supervised learning task using manually-crafted convex loss functions. While these methods are based on theoretical insights, they are inherently constrained by human creativity, so the large search space of possible loss functions remains under explored. We address this by performing LLM-driven objective discovery to automatically discover new state-of-the-art preference optimization algorithms without (expert) human intervention. Specifically, we iteratively prompt an LLM to propose and implement new preference optimization loss functions based on previously-evaluated performance metrics. This process leads to the discovery of previously-unknown and performant preference optimization algorithms. The best performing of these we call Discovered Preference Optimization (DiscoPOP), a novel algorithm that adaptively blends logistic and exponential losses. Experiments demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of DiscoPOP and its successful transfer to held-out tasks.36:T6c6,Current multimodal and multitask foundation models like 4M or UnifiedIO show promising results, but in practice their out-of-the-box abilities to accept diverse inputs and perform diverse tasks are limited by the (usually rather small) number of modalities and tasks they are trained on. In this paper, we expand upon the capabilities of them by training a single model on tens of highly diverse modalities and by performing co-training on large-scale multimodal datasets and text corpora. This includes training on several semantic and geometric modalities, feature maps from recent state of the art models like DINOv2 and ImageBind, pseudo labels of specialist models like SAM and 4DHumans, and a range of new modalities that allow for novel ways to interact with the model and steer the generation, for example image metadata or color palettes. A crucial step in this process is performing discrete tokenization on various modalities, whether they are image-like, neural network feature maps, vectors, structured data like instance segmentation or human poses, or data that can be represented as text. Through this, we expand on the out-of-the-box capabilities of multimodal models and specifically show the possibility of training one model to solve at least 3x more tasks/modalities than existing ones and doing so without a loss in performance. This enables more fine-grained and controllable multimodal generation capabilities and allows us to study the distillation of models trained on diverse data and objectives into a unified model. We successfully scale the training to a three billion parameter model using tens of modalities and different datasets. The resulting models and training code are open sourced at 4m.epfl.ch.37:T60e,Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) is a widely used offline preference optimization algorithm that reparameterizes reward functions in reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) to enhance simplicity and training stability. In this work, we propose SimPO, a simpler yet more effective approach. The effectiveness of SimPO is attributed to a key design: using the average log probability of a sequence as the implicit reward. This reward formulation better aligns with model generation and eliminates the need for a reference model, making it more compute and memory efficient. Additionally, we introduce a target reward margin to the Bradley-Terry objective to encourage a larger margin between the winning and losing responses, further improving the algorithm's performance. We compare SimPO to DPO and its latest variants across various state-of-the-art training setups, including both base and instruction-tuned models such as Mistral, Llama 3, and Gemma 2. We evaluate on extensive chat-based evaluation benchmarks, including AlpacaEval 2, MT-Bench, and Arena-Hard. Our results demonstrate that SimPO consistently and significantly outperforms existing approaches without substantially increasing response length. Specifically, SimPO outperforms DPO by up to 6.4 points on AlpacaEval 2 and by up to 7.5 points on Arena-Hard. Our top-performing model, built on Gemma-2-9B-it, achieves a 72.4% length-controlled win rate on AlpacaEval 2, a 59.1% win rate on Arena-Hard, and ranks 1st on Chatbot Arena among<10B models with real user votes.38:T59e,World models empower model-based agents to interactively explore, reason, and plan within imagined environments for real-world decision-making. However, the high demand for interactivity poses challenges in harnessing recent advancements in video generative models for developing world models at scale. This work introduces Interactive VideoGPT (iVideoGPT), a scalable autoregressive transformer framework that integrates multimodal signals--visual observations, actions, and rewards--into a sequence of tokens, facilitating an interactive experience of agents via next-token prediction. iVideoGPT features a novel compressive tokenization technique that efficiently discretizes high-dimensional visual observations. Leveraging its scalable architecture, we are able to pre-train iVideoGPT on millions of human and robotic manipulation trajectories, establishing a versatile foundation that is adaptable to serve as interactive world models for a wide range of downstream tasks. These include action-conditioned video prediction, visual planning, and model-based reinforcement learning, where iVideoGPT achieves competitive performance compared with state-of-the-art methods. Our work advances the development of interactive general world models, bridging the gap between generative video models and practical model-based reinforcement learning applications. Code and pre-trained models are available at https://thuml.github.io/iVideoGPT.39:T4b3,Even for simple arithmetic tasks like integer addition, it is challenging for Transformers to generalize to longer sequences than those encountered during training. To tackle this problem, we propose position coupling, a simple yet effective method that directly embeds the structure of the tasks into the positional encoding of a (decoder-only) Transformer. Taking a departure from the vanilla absolute position mechanism assigning unique position IDs to each of the tokens, we assign the same position IDs to two or more"relevant"tokens; for integer addition tasks, we regard digits of the same significance as in the same position. On the empirical side, we show that with the proposed position coupling, our models trained on 1 to 30-digit additions can generalize up to 200-digit additions (6.67x of the trained length). On the theoretical side, we prove that a 1-layer Transformer with coupled positions can solve the addition task involving exponentially many digits, whereas any 1-layer Transformer without positional information cannot entirely solve it. We also demonstrate that position coupling can be applied to other algorithmic tasks such as Nx2 multiplication and a two-dimensional task.3a:T5a7,The attention mechanism within the transformer architecture enables the model to weigh and combine tokens based on their relevance to the query. While self-attention has enjoyed major success, it notably treats all queries $q$ in the same way by applying the mapping $V^\top\text{softmax}(Kq)$, where $V,K$ are the value and key embeddings respectively. In this work, we argue that this uniform treatment hinders the ability to control contextual sparsity and relevance. As a solution, we introduce the $\textit{Selective Self-Attention}$ (SSA) layer that augments the softmax nonlinearity with a principled temperature scaling strategy. By controlling temperature, SSA adapts the contextual sparsity of the attention map to the query embedding and its position in the context window. Through theory and experiments, we demonstrate that this alleviates attention dilution, aids the optimization process, and enhances the model's ability to control softmax spikiness of individual queries. We also incorporate temperature scaling for value embeddings and show that it boosts the model's ability to suppress irrelevant/noisy tokens. Notably, SSA is a lightweight method which introduces less than 0.5% new parameters through a weight-sharing strategy and can be fine-tuned on existing LLMs. Extensive empirical evaluations demonstrate that SSA-equipped models achieve a noticeable and consistent accuracy improvement on language modeling benchmarks.3b:T687,Planning is a crucial element of both human intelligence and contemporary large language models (LLMs). In this paper, we initiate a theoretical investigation into the emergence of planning capabilities in Transformer-based LLMs via their next-word prediction mechanisms. We model planning as a network path-finding task, where the objective is to generate a valid path from a specified source node to a designated target node. Our mathematical characterization  shows that Transformer architectures can execute path-finding by embedding the adjacency and reachability matrices within their weights. Furthermore, our theoretical analysis of gradient-based learning dynamics reveals that LLMs can learn both the adjacency  and a limited form of the reachability matrices. These theoretical insights are then validated through experiments, which demonstrate that Transformer architectures indeed learn the adjacency and an incomplete reachability matrices, consistent with our theoretical predictions. When applying our methodology to the real-world planning benchmark Blocksworld, our observations remain consistent. Additionally, our analyses uncover a fundamental limitation of current Transformer architectures in path-finding: these architectures cannot identify reachability relationships through transitivity, which leads to failures in generating paths when concatenation is required. These findings provide new insights into how the internal mechanisms of autoregressive learning facilitate intelligent planning and deepen our understanding of how future LLMs might achieve more advanced and general planning-and-reasoning capabilities across diverse applications.3c:T4f3,In enhancing the reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs), prior research primarily focuses on specific prompting techniques such as few-shot or zero-shot chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting. These methods, while effective, often involve manually intensive prompt engineering. Our study takes a novel approach by asking: Can LLMs reason effectively without any prompting? Our findings reveal that, intriguingly, CoT reasoning paths can be elicited from pre-trained LLMs by simply altering the \textit{decoding} process. Rather than conventional greedy decoding, we investigate the top-$k$ alternative tokens, uncovering that CoT paths are frequently inherent in these sequences. This approach not only bypasses the confounders of prompting but also allows us to assess the LLMs' \textit{intrinsic} reasoning abilities. Moreover, we observe that the presence of a CoT in the decoding path correlates with a higher confidence in the model's decoded answer. This confidence metric effectively differentiates between CoT and non-CoT paths. Extensive empirical studies on various reasoning benchmarks show that the proposed CoT-decoding effectively elicits reasoning capabilities from language models, which were previously obscured by standard greedy decoding.3d:T4f1,This paper aims to overcome the"lost-in-the-middle"challenge of large language models (LLMs). While recent advancements have successfully enabled LLMs to perform stable language modeling with up to 4 million tokens, the persistent difficulty faced by most LLMs in identifying relevant information situated in the middle of the context has not been adequately tackled. To address this problem, this paper introduces Multi-scale Positional Encoding (Ms-PoE) which is a simple yet effective plug-and-play approach to enhance the capacity of LLMs to handle the relevant information located in the middle of the context, without fine-tuning or introducing any additional overhead. Ms-PoE leverages the position indice rescaling to relieve the long-term decay effect introduced by RoPE, while meticulously assigning distinct scaling ratios to different attention heads to preserve essential knowledge learned during the pre-training step, forming a multi-scale context fusion from short to long distance. Extensive experiments with a wide range of LLMs demonstrate the efficacy of our approach. Notably, Ms-PoE achieves an average accuracy gain of up to 3.8 on the Zero-SCROLLS benchmark over the original LLMs. Code are available at https://github.com/VITA-Group/Ms-PoE.3e:T662,Transformer architectures have been widely adopted in foundation models. Due to their high inference costs, there is renewed interest in exploring the potential of efficient recurrent architectures (RNNs). In this paper, we analyze the differences in the representational capabilities of Transformers and RNNs across several tasks of practical relevance, including index lookup, nearest neighbor, recognizing bounded Dyck languages, and string equality. For the tasks considered, our results show separations based on the size of the model required for different architectures. For example, we show that a one-layer Transformer of logarithmic width can perform index lookup, whereas an RNN requires a hidden state of linear size. Conversely, while constant-size RNNs can recognize bounded Dyck languages, we show that one-layer Transformers require a linear size for this task. Furthermore, we show that two-layer Transformers of logarithmic size can perform decision tasks such as string equality or disjointness, whereas both one-layer Transformers and recurrent models require linear size for these tasks. We also show that a log-size two-layer Transformer can implement the nearest neighbor algorithm in its forward pass; on the other hand recurrent models require linear size. Our constructions are based on the existence of $N$ nearly orthogonal vectors in $O(\log N)$ dimensional space and our lower bounds are based on reductions from communication complexity problems. We supplement our theoretical results with experiments that highlight the differences in the performance of these architectures on practical-size sequences.3f:T6ab,Transformer-based large language models (LLMs) have displayed remarkable creative prowess and emergence capabilities. Existing empirical studies have revealed a strong connection between these LLMs'impressive emergence abilities and their in-context learning (ICL) capacity, allowing them to solve new tasks using only task-specific prompts without further fine-tuning. On the other hand, existing empirical and theoretical studies also show that there is a linear regularity of the multi-concept encoded semantic representation behind transformer-based LLMs. However, existing theoretical work fail to build up an understanding of the connection between this regularity and the innovative power of ICL. Additionally, prior work often focuses on simplified, unrealistic scenarios involving linear transformers or unrealistic loss functions, and they achieve only linear or sub-linear convergence rates. In contrast, this work provides a fine-grained mathematical analysis to show how transformers leverage the multi-concept semantics of words to enable powerful ICL and excellent out-of-distribution ICL abilities, offering insights into how transformers innovate solutions for certain unseen tasks encoded with multiple cross-concept semantics. Inspired by empirical studies on the linear latent geometry of LLMs, the analysis is based on a concept-based low-noise sparse coding prompt model. Leveraging advanced techniques, this work showcases the exponential 0-1 loss convergence over the highly non-convex training dynamics, which pioneeringly incorporates the challenges of softmax self-attention, ReLU-activated MLPs, and cross-entropy loss. Empirical simulations corroborate the theoretical findings.40:T4cc,Comparison data elicited from people are fundamental to many machine learning tasks, including reinforcement learning from human feedback for large language models and estimating ranking models. They are typically subjective and not directly verifiable. How to truthfully elicit such comparison data from rational individuals? We design peer prediction mechanisms for eliciting comparison data using a bonus-penalty payment. Our design leverages on the strong stochastic transitivity for comparison data to create symmetrically strongly truthful mechanisms such that truth-telling 1) forms a strict Bayesian Nash equilibrium, and 2) yields the highest payment among all symmetric equilibria. Each individual only needs to evaluate one pair of items and report her comparison in our mechanism.

We further extend the bonus-penalty payment concept to eliciting networked data, designing a symmetrically strongly truthful mechanism when agents’ private signals are sampled according to the Ising models. We provide the necessary and sufficient conditions for our bonus-penalty payment to have truth-telling as a strict Bayesian Nash equilibrium. Experiments on two real-world datasets further support our theoretical discoveries.41:T5e4,User intentions are typically formalized as evaluation rewards to be maximized when fine-tuning language models (LMs). Existing alignment methods, such as Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), are mainly tailored for pairwise preference data where rewards are implicitly defined rather than explicitly given. In this paper, we introduce a general framework for LM alignment, leveraging Noise Contrastive Estimation (NCE) to bridge the gap in handling reward datasets explicitly annotated with scalar evaluations. Our framework comprises two parallel algorithms, NCA and InfoNCA, both enabling the direct extraction of an LM policy from reward data as well as preference data. Notably, we show that the DPO loss is a special case of our proposed InfoNCA objective under pairwise preference settings, thereby integrating and extending current alignment theories. By comparing NCA and InfoNCA, we demonstrate that the well-observed decreasing-likelihood trend of DPO/InfoNCA is caused by their focus on adjusting relative likelihood across different responses.
In contrast, NCA optimizes the absolute likelihood for each response, thereby effectively preventing the chosen likelihood from decreasing. We evaluate our methods in both reward and preference settings with Mistral-8$\times$7B and 7B models. Experiments suggest that InfoNCA/NCA surpasses various preference baselines when reward datasets are available. We also find NCA significantly outperforms DPO in complex reasoning tasks like math and coding.42:T59e,Although recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have significantly improved their performance on various tasks, they still face challenges with complex and symbolic multi-step reasoning, particularly in mathematical reasoning. To bolster the mathematical reasoning capabilities of LLMs, most existing efforts concentrate on seeking assistance from either domain experts or GPT-4 for high-quality process-supervised data, which is not only expensive but also labor-intensive. In our study, we propose an innovative framework, AlphaMath, that bypasses the need for process annotations (from humans or GPTs) by leveraging Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS). This framework focuses on unleashing the potential of a well-pretrained LLM to autonomously enhance its mathematical reasoning. Specifically, we integrate a value model with the LLM, automatically generating both process supervision and step-level evaluation signals in MCTS. Furthermore, we propose an efficient inference strategy—step-level beam search, where the value model is crafted to assist the policy model (i.e., LLM) in navigating more effective reasoning paths, rather than solely relying on prior probabilities. The experimental results on both in-domain and out-of-domain datasets demonstrate that even without GPT-4 or human-annotated process supervision, our AlphaMath framework achieves comparable or superior results to previous state-of-the-art methods.43:T42e,As the usage of large language models (LLMs) grows, it becomes increasingly important to serve them quickly and efficiently. While speculative decoding has recently emerged as a promising direction for accelerating LLM serving, existing methods are limited in their ability to scale to larger speculation budgets and adapt to different hyperparameters. This paper introduces Sequoia, a scalable and robust algorithm for speculative decoding. To improve scalability, Sequoia introduces a dynamic programming algorithm to find an optimal tree structure for the speculated tokens. To achieve robust speculative decoding, Sequoia uses a novel sampling and verification method that outperforms prior work across different decoding temperatures. Sequoia improves the decoding speed of Llama2-7B, Llama2-13B, and Vicuna-33B on an A100 GPU by up to $4.04\times$, $3.73\times$, and $2.27 \times$. To serve Llama3-70B-Instruct on a single L40 GPU through offloading, Sequoia reduces the per-token decoding latency to 0.60 s/token, $9.5\times$ faster than DeepSpeed-Zero-Inference.44:T5a5,Preference learning algorithms (e.g., RLHF and DPO) are frequently used to steer LLMs to produce generations that are more preferred by humans, but our understanding of their inner workings is still limited. In this work, we study the conventional wisdom that preference learning trains models to assign higher likelihoods to more preferred outputs than less preferred outputs, measured via *ranking accuracy*.
Surprisingly, we find that most state-of-the-art preference-tuned models achieve a ranking accuracy of less than 60% on common preference datasets. We furthermore derive the *idealized ranking accuracy* that a preference-tuned LLM would achieve if it optimized the DPO or RLHF objective perfectly. We demonstrate that existing models exhibit a significant *alignment gap* -- *i.e.*, a gap between the observed and idealized ranking accuracies. 
We attribute this discrepancy to the DPO objective, which is empirically and theoretically ill-suited to correct even mild ranking errors in the reference model, and derive a simple and efficient formula for quantifying the difficulty of learning a given preference datapoint.
Finally, we demonstrate that ranking accuracy strongly correlates with the empirically popular win rate metric when the model is close to the reference model used in the objective, shedding further light on the differences between on-policy (e.g., RLHF) and off-policy (e.g., DPO) preference learning algorithms.45:T6e9,Large Language Models (LLMs) are widely used in today's tasks of natural language processing. 
To support applications like multi-turn chats, document understanding, and content generation, models with long context lengths are growing in importance.
However, managing long contexts brings substantial challenges due to the expansion of key-value cache (KV cache). Longer KV cache requires larger memory, limiting the batch-size thus decreasing throughput. Also, computing attention over long KV cache incurs more memory access, hurting the end-to-end latency.
Prior works find that it is sufficient to use only the recent and high-impact tokens for attention computation, allowing the eviction of less vital tokens to shrink cache size.
Nonetheless, we observe a dynamic shift in token importance across different decoding steps. Tokens initially evicted might regain importance after certain decoding steps.
To address this, we propose ArkVale, a page-based KV cache manager that can recognize and recall currently important tokens evicted before. We asynchronously copy the filled page into external memory (e.g., CPU memory) as backup and summarize it into a much smaller digest by constructing the bounding-volume of its keys. Before attention computation, we measure all pages' importance based on their digests, recall the important ones, evict the unimportant ones, and select the top-ranked pages for attention computation. 
Experiment results show that ArkVale performs well on various long context tasks with negligible accuracy loss under 2k$\sim$4k cache budget and can improve decoding latency to $2.2\times$ and batching throughput to $4.6\times$ because it applies attention on only a small subset of pages and reduce per-sample memory usage of KV cache.46:T41f,A striking property of transformers is their ability to perform in-context learning (ICL), a machine learning framework in which the learner is presented with a novel context during inference implicitly through some data, and tasked with making a prediction in that context. As such, that learner must adapt to the context without additional training. We explore the role of *softmax* attention in an ICL setting where each context encodes a regression task. We show that an attention unit learns a window that it uses to implement a nearest-neighbors predictor adapted to the landscape of the pretraining tasks. Specifically, we show that this window widens with decreasing Lipschitzness and increasing label noise in the pretraining tasks. We also show that on low-rank, linear problems, the attention unit learns to project onto the appropriate subspace before inference. Further, we show that this adaptivity relies crucially on the softmax activation and thus cannot be replicated by the linear activation often studied in prior theoretical analyses.47:T543,Many empirical studies have provided evidence for the emergence of algorithmic mechanisms (abilities) in the learning of language models, that lead to qualitative improvements of the model capabilities. Yet, a theoretical characterization of how such mechanisms emerge remains elusive. In this paper, we take a step in this direction by providing a tight theoretical analysis of the emergence of semantic attention in a solvable model of dot-product attention. More precisely, we consider a non-linear self-attention layer with trainable tied and low-rank query and key matrices. In the asymptotic limit of high-dimensional data and a comparably large number of training samples we provide a tight closed-form characterization of the global minimum of the non-convex empirical loss landscape. We show that this minimum corresponds to either a positional attention mechanism (with tokens attending to each other based on their respective positions) or a semantic attention mechanism (with tokens attending to each other based on their meaning), and evidence an emergent phase transition from the former to the latter with increasing sample complexity. Finally, we compare the dot-product attention layer to a linear positional baseline, and show that it outperforms the latter using the semantic mechanism provided it has access to sufficient data.48:T440,This paper reveals the phenomenon of parameter heterogeneity in large language models (LLMs). We find that a small subset of ``cherry'' parameters exhibit a disproportionately large influence on model performance, while the vast majority of parameters have minimal impact. This heterogeneity is found to be prevalent across different model families, scales, and types. Motivated by this observation, we propose CherryQ, a novel quantization method that unifies the optimization of mixed-precision parameters. CherryQ identifies and preserves the critical cherry parameters in high precision while aggressively quantizing the remaining parameters to low precision. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of CherryQ. CherryQ outperforms existing quantization approaches in terms of perplexity and downstream task performance. Notably, our 3-bit quantized Vicuna-1.5 exhibits competitive performance compared to their 16-bit counterparts. These findings highlight the potential of CherryQ for enabling efficient deployment of LLMs by taking advantage of parameter heterogeneity.49:T44a,Weight decay is a broadly used technique for training state-of-the-art deep networks from image classification to large language models. Despite its widespread usage and being extensively studied in the classical literature, its role remains poorly understood for deep learning. In this work, we highlight that the role of weight decay in modern deep learning is different from its regularization effect studied in classical learning theory. For deep networks on vision tasks trained with multipass SGD, we show how weight decay modifies the optimization dynamics enhancing the ever-present implicit regularization of SGD via the *loss stabilization mechanism*. In contrast, for large language models trained with nearly one-epoch training, we describe how weight decay balances the *bias-variance tradeoff* in stochastic optimization leading to lower training loss and improved training stability. 
Overall, we present a unifying perspective from ResNets on vision tasks to LLMs: weight decay is never useful as an explicit regularizer but instead changes the training dynamics in a desirable way.4a:T43f,Transformer-based large language models (LLMs) typically have a limited context window, resulting in significant performance degradation when processing text beyond the length of the context window. Extensive studies have been proposed to extend the context window and achieve length extrapolation of LLMs, but there is still a lack of in-depth interpretation of these approaches. In this study, we explore the positional information within and beyond the context window for deciphering the underlying mechanism of LLMs. By using a mean-based decomposition method, we disentangle positional vectors from hidden states of LLMs and analyze their formation and effect on attention. Furthermore, when texts exceed the context window, we analyze the change of positional vectors in two settings, i.e., direct extrapolation and context window extension. Based on our findings, we design two training-free context window extension methods, positional vector replacement and attention window extension. Experimental results show that our methods can effectively extend the context window length.4b:T4c4,Recent studies have put into question the belief that emergent abilities in language models are exclusive to large models. This skepticism arises from two observations: 1) smaller models can also exhibit high performance on emergent abilities and 2) there is doubt on the discontinuous metrics used to measure these abilities. In this paper, we propose to study emergent abilities in the lens of pre-training loss, instead of model size or training compute. We demonstrate that the Transformer models with the same pre-training loss, but different model and data sizes, generate the same performance on various downstream tasks, with a fixed data corpus, tokenization, and model architecture. We also discover that a model exhibits emergent abilities on certain tasks -- regardless of the continuity of metrics -- when its pre-training loss falls below a specific threshold. Before reaching this threshold, its performance remains at the level of random guessing. This inspires us to redefine emergent abilities as those that manifest in models with lower pre-training losses, highlighting that these abilities cannot be predicted by merely extrapolating the performance trends of models with higher pre-training losses.4c:T47a,Data curation is an essential component of large-scale pretraining. In this work, we demonstrate that jointly selecting batches of data is more effective for learning than selecting examples independently. Multimodal contrastive objectives expose the dependencies between data and thus naturally yield criteria for measuring the joint learnability of a batch. We derive a simple and tractable algorithm for selecting such batches, which significantly accelerate training beyond individually-prioritized data points. As performance improves by selecting from larger super-batches, we also leverage recent advances in model approximation to reduce the associated computational overhead. As a result, our approach--multimodal contrastive learning with joint example selection (JEST)--surpasses state-of-the-art models with up to 13$\times$ fewer iterations and 10$\times$ less computation. Essential to the performance of JEST is the ability to steer the data selection process towards the distribution of smaller, well-curated datasets via pretrained reference models, exposing the level of data curation as a new dimension for neural scaling laws.4d:T5b2,Large Language Models (LLMs) are distinguished by their massive parameter counts, which typically result in significant redundancy. This work introduces MaskLLM, a learnable pruning method that establishes Semi-structured (or ``N:M'') Sparsity in LLMs, aimed at reducing computational overhead during inference. Instead of developing a new importance criterion, MaskLLM explicitly models N:M patterns as a learnable distribution through Gumbel Softmax sampling. This approach facilitates end-to-end training on large-scale datasets and offers two notable advantages: 1) High-quality Masks - our method effectively scales to large datasets and learns accurate masks; 2) Transferability - the probabilistic modeling of mask distribution enables the transfer learning of sparsity across domains or tasks. We assessed MaskLLM using 2:4 sparsity on various LLMs, including LLaMA-2, Nemotron-4, and GPT-3, with sizes ranging from 843M to 15B parameters, and our empirical results show substantial improvements over state-of-the-art methods. For instance, leading approaches achieve a perplexity (PPL) of 10 or greater on Wikitext compared to the dense model's 5.12 PPL, but MaskLLM achieves a significantly lower 6.72 PPL solely by learning the masks with frozen weights. Furthermore, MaskLLM's learnable nature allows customized masks for lossless application of 2:4 sparsity to downstream tasks or domains. Code is available at https://github.com/NVlabs/MaskLLM.4e:T50b,Despite Flow Matching and diffusion models having emerged as powerful generative paradigms for continuous variables such as images and videos, their application to high-dimensional discrete data, such as language, is still limited.  In this work, we present Discrete Flow Matching, a novel discrete flow paradigm designed specifically for generating discrete data.  Discrete Flow Matching offers several key contributions:  (i) it works with a general family of probability paths interpolating between source and target distributions; (ii) it allows for a generic formula for sampling from these probability paths using learned posteriors such as the probability denoiser ($x$-prediction) and noise-prediction ($\epsilon$-prediction); (iii) practically, focusing on specific probability paths defined with different schedulers improves generative perplexity compared to previous discrete diffusion and flow models; and (iv) by scaling Discrete Flow Matching models up to 1.7B parameters, we reach 6.7% Pass@1 and 13.4% Pass@10 on HumanEval and 6.7% Pass@1 and 20.6% Pass@10 on 1-shot MBPP coding benchmarks. Our approach is capable of generating high-quality discrete data in a non-autoregressive fashion, significantly closing the gap between autoregressive models and discrete flow models.4f:T51c,We present an novel framework for efficiently and effectively extending the powerful continuous diffusion processes to discrete modeling. Previous approaches have suffered from the discrepancy between discrete data and continuous modeling. Our study reveals that the absence of guidance from discrete boundaries in learning probability contours is one of the main reasons. To address this issue, we propose a two-step forward process that first estimates the boundary as a prior distribution and then rescales the forward trajectory to construct a boundary conditional diffusion model. The reverse process is proportionally adjusted to guarantee that the learned contours yield more precise discrete data. Experimental results indicate that our approach achieves strong performance in both language modeling and discrete image generation tasks. In language modeling, our approach surpasses previous state-of-the-art continuous diffusion language models in three translation tasks and a summarization task, while also demonstrating competitive performance compared to auto-regressive transformers. Moreover, our method achieves comparable results to continuous diffusion models when using discrete ordinal pixels and establishes a new state-of-the-art for categorical image generation on the Cifar-10 dataset.50:T5ec,Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) is a prevalent approach to align AI systems with human values by learning rewards from human preference data. Due to various reasons, however, such data typically takes the form of rankings over pairs of trajectory segments, which fails to capture the varying strengths of preferences across different pairs. In this paper, we propose a novel adaptive preference loss, underpinned by distributionally robust optimization (DRO), designed to address this uncertainty in preference strength. By incorporating an adaptive scaling parameter into the loss for each pair, our method increases the flexibility of the reward function. Specifically, it assigns small scaling parameters to pairs with ambiguous preferences, leading to more comparable rewards, and large scaling parameters to those with clear preferences for more distinct rewards. Computationally, our proposed loss function is strictly convex and univariate with respect to each scaling parameter, enabling its efficient optimization through a simple second-order algorithm. Our method is versatile and can be readily adapted to various preference optimization frameworks, including direct preference optimization (DPO). Our experiments with robotic control and natural language generation with large language models (LLMs) show that our method not only improves policy performance but also aligns reward function selection more closely with policy optimization, simplifying the hyperparameter tuning process.51:T445,Training deep neural networks (DNNs) is costly. Fortunately, Nvidia Ampere and Hopper GPUs can accelerate matrix multiplications twice as fast as a dense equivalent by implementing 2:4 sparsity. However, previous STE-based 2:4 pre-training methods (\eg~STE with hard-thresholding, SR-STE) suffer from optimization difficulties because of discontinuous pruning function.
In this study, we comprehensively analyse the bottleneck of traditional N:M sparse training and recognize three drawbacks with discontinuity: incorrect descending direction, inability to predict the amount of descent and sparse mask oscillation. In the light of this statement, we propose S-STE, a simple yet powerful 2:4 training method that contains two parts: to continuously project weights to be 2:4 sparse, and to rescale sparse weights with a per-tensor fixed scaling factor. Besides, we adopt minimum-variance unbiased estimation for activation gradient and FP8 quantization for whole process. Results show that our method surpass previous 2:4 pre-training recipes and is comparable even with full parameter models.52:T4e7,This paper introduces Chain-of-Sight, a vision-language bridge module that accelerates the pre-training of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs). 
Our approach employs a sequence of visual resamplers that capture visual details at various spacial scales.
This architecture not only leverages global and local visual contexts effectively, but also facilitates the flexible extension of visual tokens through a compound token scaling strategy, allowing up to a 16x increase in the token count post pre-training.
Consequently, Chain-of-Sight requires significantly fewer visual tokens in the pre-training phase compared to the fine-tuning phase. 
This intentional reduction of visual tokens during pre-training notably accelerates the pre-training process, cutting down the wall-clock training time by $\sim$73\%.
Empirical results on a series of vision-language benchmarks reveal that the pre-train acceleration through Chain-of-Sight is achieved without sacrificing performance, matching or surpassing the standard pipeline of utilizing all visual tokens throughout the entire training process. 
Further scaling up the number of visual tokens for pre-training leads to stronger performances, competitive to existing approaches in a series of benchmarks.53:T502,Collecting large quantities of high-quality data can be  prohibitively expensive or impractical, and a bottleneck in machine learning. One may instead augment a small set of $n$ data points from the target distribution with data from more accessible sources, e.g. data collected under different circumstances or synthesized by generative models. We refer to such data  as `surrogate data'. We study a weighted empirical risk minimization (ERM) approach for integrating surrogate data into training. We analyze mathematically this method under several classical statistical models, and validate our findings empirically on datasets from different domains. Our main findings are: $(i)$ Integrating surrogate data can significantly reduce the test error on the original distribution. Surprisingly, this can happen even when the surrogate data is unrelated to the original ones. We trace back this behavior to the classical Stein's paradox. $(ii)$ In order to reap the benefit of surrogate data, it is crucial to use optimally weighted ERM. $(iii)$ The test error of models trained on mixtures of real and surrogate data is approximately described by a scaling law. This scaling law can be used to predict the optimal weighting scheme, and to choose the amount of surrogate data to add.54:T637,With the rapid development of large language models (LLMs) and ever-evolving practical requirements, finding an efficient and effective alignment method has never been more critical. However, the tension between the complexity of current alignment methods and the need for rapid iteration in deployment scenarios necessitates the development of a model-agnostic alignment approach that can operate under these constraints. In this paper, we introduce Aligner, a novel and simple alignment paradigm that learns the correctional residuals between preferred and dispreferred answers using a small model. Designed as a model-agnostic, plug-and-play module, Aligner can be directly applied to various open-source and API-based models with only one-off training, making it suitable for rapid iteration. Notably, Aligner can be applied to any powerful, large-scale upstream models. Moreover, it can even iteratively bootstrap the upstream models using corrected responses as synthetic human preference data, breaking through the model's performance ceiling. Our experiments demonstrate performance improvements by deploying the same Aligner model across 11 different LLMs, evaluated on the 3H dimensions (helpfulness, harmlessness, and honesty). Specifically, Aligner-7B has achieved an average improvement of 68.9% in helpfulness and 22.8% in harmlessness across the tested LLMs while also effectively reducing hallucination. In the Alpaca-Eval leaderboard, stacking Aligner-2B on GPT-4 Turbo improved its LC Win Rate from 55.0% to 58.3%, surpassing GPT-4 Omni's 57.5% Win Rate (community report).55:T6bb,As Large Language Models (LLMs) demonstrate extensive capability in learning from documents, LLM unlearning becomes an increasingly important research area to address concerns of LLMs in terms of privacy, copyright, etc. A conventional LLM unlearning task typically involves two goals: (1) The target LLM should forget the knowledge in the specified forget documents; and (2) it should retain the other knowledge that the LLM possesses, for which we assume access to a small number of retain documents. To achieve both goals, a mainstream class of LLM unlearning methods introduces an optimization framework with a combination of two objectives – maximizing the prediction loss on the forget documents while minimizing that on the retain documents, which suffers from two challenges, degenerated output and catastrophic forgetting. In this paper, we propose a novel unlearning framework called Unlearning from Logit Difference (ULD), which introduces an assistant LLM that aims to achieve the opposite of the unlearning goals: remembering the forget documents and forgetting the retain knowledge. ULD then derives the unlearned LLM by computing the logit difference between the target and the assistant LLMs. We show that such reversed objectives would naturally resolve both aforementioned challenges while significantly improving the training efficiency. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method efficiently achieves the intended forgetting while preserving the LLM’s overall capabilities, reducing training time by more than threefold. Notably, our method loses 0% of model utility on the ToFU benchmark, whereas baseline methods may sacrifice 17% of utility on average to achieve comparable forget quality.56:T407,Knowledge distillation (KD) has been shown to be highly effective in guiding a student model with a larger teacher model and achieving practical benefits in improving the computational and memory efficiency for large language models (LLMs). State-of-the-art KD methods for LLMs mostly rely on minimizing explicit metrics measuring the divergence between teacher and student probability predictions. Instead of optimizing these mandatory cloning objectives, we explore an imitation learning strategy for KD of LLMs. In particular, we minimize the imitation gap by matching the action-value moments of the teacher's behavior from both on- and off-policy perspectives. To achieve this moment-matching goal, we propose an adversarial training algorithm to jointly estimate the moment-matching distance and optimize the student policy to minimize it. Results from both task-agnostic instruction-following experiments and task-specific experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method and achieve new state-of-the-art performance.57:T586,Recent years have witnessed a clear trend towards language models with an ever-increasing number of parameters, as well as the growing training overhead and memory usage. Distributed training, particularly through Sharded Data Parallelism (ShardedDP) which partitions optimizer states among workers, has emerged as a crucial technique to mitigate training time and memory usage. Yet, a major challenge in the scalability of ShardedDP is the intensive communication of weights and gradients. While compression techniques can alleviate this issue, they often result in worse accuracy. Driven by this limitation, we propose SDP4Bit (Toward 4Bit Communication Quantization in Sharded Data Parallelism for LLM Training), which effectively reduces the communication of weights and gradients to nearly 4 bits via two novel techniques: quantization on weight differences, and two-level gradient smooth quantization. Furthermore, SDP4Bit presents an algorithm-system co-design with runtime optimization to minimize the computation overhead of compression. Additional to the theoretical guarantees of convergence, we empirically evaluate the accuracy of SDP4Bit on the pre-training of GPT models with up to 6.7 billion parameters, and the results demonstrate a negligible impact on training loss. Furthermore, speed experiments show that SDP4Bit achieves up to 4.08× speedup in end-to-end throughput on a scale of 128 GPUs.58:T5c6,Large language models have shown an impressive societal impact owing to their excellent understanding and logical reasoning skills. However, such strong ability relies on a huge amount of computing resources, which makes it difficult to deploy LLMs on computing resource-constrained platforms. Currently, LLMs process each token equivalently, but we argue that not every word is equally important. Some words should not be allocated excessive computing resources, particularly for dispensable terms in simple questions. In this paper, we propose a novel dynamic inference paradigm for LLMs, namely D-LLMs, which adaptively allocate computing resources in token processing. We design a dynamic decision module for each transformer layer that decides whether a network unit should be executed or skipped. Moreover, we tackle the issue of adapting D-LLMs to real-world applications, specifically concerning the missing KV-cache when layers are skipped. To overcome this, we propose a simple yet effective eviction policy to exclude the skipped layers from subsequent attention calculations. The eviction policy not only enables D-LLMs to be compatible with prevalent applications but also reduces considerable storage resources. Experimentally, D-LLMs show superior performance, in terms of computational cost and KV storage utilization. It can reduce up to 45\% computational cost and KV storage on Q\&A, summarization, and math solving tasks, 50\% on commonsense reasoning tasks.59:T5c8,Scalable oversight protocols aim to enable humans to accurately supervise superhuman AI. In this paper we study debate, where two AI's compete to convince a judge; consultancy, where a single AI tries to convince a judge that asks questions; and compare to a baseline of direct question-answering, where the judge just answers outright without the AI. We use large language models (LLMs) as both AI agents and as stand-ins for human judges, taking the judge models to be weaker than agent models. We benchmark on a diverse range of asymmetries between judges and agents, extending previous work on a single extractive QA task with information asymmetry, to also include mathematics, coding, logic and multimodal reasoning asymmetries. We find that debate outperforms consultancy across all tasks when the consultant is randomly assigned to argue for the correct/incorrect answer. Comparing debate to direct question answering, the results depend on the type of task: in extractive QA tasks with information asymmetry debate outperforms direct question answering, but in other tasks without information asymmetry the results are mixed. Previous work assigned debaters/consultants an answer to argue for. When we allow them to instead choose which answer to argue for, we find judges are less frequently convinced by the wrong answer in debate than in consultancy. Further, we find that stronger debater models increase judge accuracy, though more modestly than in previous studies.5a:T495,With the increasing complexity of generative AI models, post-training quantization (PTQ) has emerged as a promising solution for deploying hyper-scale models on edge devices such as mobile and TVs.
Existing PTQ schemes, however, consume considerable time and resources, which could be a bottleneck in real situations where frequent model updates and multiple hyperparameter tunings are required.
As a cost-effective alternative, learning-free PTQ schemes have been proposed. 
However, the performance is somewhat limited because they cannot consider the inter-layer dependency within the attention module, which is a significant feature of Transformers.
In this paper, we thus propose a novel PTQ algorithm that balances accuracy and efficiency.
The key idea of the proposed algorithm called aespa is to perform quantization layer-wise for efficiency while targeting attention-wise reconstruction to consider the cross-layer dependency.
Through extensive experiments on various language models and complexity analysis, we demonstrate that aespa is accurate and efficient in quantizing Transformer models. The code will be available at https: //github.com/SamsungLabs/aespa.5b:T49f,We present Preference Flow Matching (PFM), a new framework for preference alignment that streamlines the integration of preferences into an arbitrary class of pre-trained models. Existing alignment methods require fine-tuning pre-trained models, which presents challenges such as scalability, inefficiency, and the need for model modifications, especially with black-box APIs like GPT-4. In contrast, PFM utilizes flow matching techniques to directly learn from preference data, thereby reducing the dependency on extensive fine-tuning of pre-trained models. By leveraging flow-based models, PFM transforms less preferred data into preferred outcomes, and effectively aligns model outputs with human preferences without relying on explicit or implicit reward function estimation, thus avoiding common issues like overfitting in reward models. We provide theoretical insights that support our method’s alignment with standard preference alignment objectives. Experimental results indicate the practical effectiveness of our method, offering a new direction in aligning a pre-trained model to preference. Our code is available at https://github.com/jadehaus/preference-flow-matching.5c:T446,Autoregressive language models have achieved remarkable advancements, yet their potential is often limited by the slow inference speeds associated with sequential token generation. Blockwise parallel decoding (BPD) was proposed by Stern et al. [42] as a method to improve inference speed of language models by simultaneously predicting multiple future tokens, termed block drafts, which are subsequently verified by the autoregressive model. This paper advances the understanding and improvement of block drafts in two ways. First, we analyze token distributions generated across multiple prediction heads. Second, leveraging these insights, we propose algorithms to improve BPD inference speed by refining the block drafts using task-independent \ngram and neural language models as lightweight rescorers. Experiments demonstrate that by refining block drafts of open-sourced Vicuna and Medusa LLMs, the mean accepted token length are increased by 5-25% relative. This results in over a 3x speedup in wall clock time compared to standard autoregressive decoding in open-source 7B and 13B LLMs.5d:T420,Human feedback is central to the alignment of Large Language Models (LLMs). However, open questions remain about the methods (how), domains (where), people (who) and objectives (to what end) of feedback processes. To navigate these questions, we introduce PRISM, a new dataset which maps the sociodemographics and stated preferences of 1,500 diverse participants from 75 countries, to their contextual preferences and fine-grained feedback in 8,011 live conversations with 21 LLMs. With PRISM, we contribute (i) wider geographic and demographic participation in feedback; (ii) census-representative samples for two countries (UK, US); and (iii) individualised ratings that link to detailed participant profiles, permitting personalisation and attribution of sample artefacts. We target subjective and multicultural perspectives on value-laden and controversial issues, where we expect interpersonal and cross-cultural disagreement. We use PRISM in three case studies to demonstrate the need for careful consideration of which humans provide alignment data.5e:T553,Although current large language models are complex, the most basic specifications of the underlying language generation problem itself are simple to state: given a finite set of training samples from an unknown language, produce valid new strings from the language that don't already appear in the training data. Here we ask what we can conclude about language generation using only this specification, without further assumptions. In particular, suppose that an adversary enumerates the strings of an unknown target language L that is known only to come from one of a possibly infinite list of candidates. A computational agent is trying to learn to generate from this language; we say that the agent generates from $L$ in the limit if after some finite point in the enumeration of $L$, the agent is able to produce new elements that come exclusively from $L$ and that have not yet been presented by the adversary. Our main result is that there is an agent that is able to generate in the limit for every countable list of candidate languages. This contrasts dramatically with negative results due to Gold and Angluin in a well-studied model of language learning where the goal is to identify an unknown language from samples; the difference between these results suggests that identifying a language is a fundamentally different problem than generating from it.5f:T682,The effect of regularizers such as weight decay when training deep neural networks is not well understood. We study the influence of weight decay as well as $L2$-regularization when training neural network models in which parameter matrices interact multiplicatively. This combination is of particular interest as this parametrization is common in attention layers, the workhorse of transformers. Here, key-query, as well as value-projection parameter matrices, are multiplied directly with each other: $W_K^TW_Q$ and $PW_V$. 
We extend previous results and show on one hand that any local minimum of a $L2$-regularized loss of the form $L(AB^\top) + \lambda (\|A\|^2 + \|B\|^2)$ coincides with a minimum of the nuclear norm-regularized loss $L(AB^\top) + \lambda\|AB^\top\|_*$, and on the other hand that the 2 losses become identical exponentially quickly during training. We thus complement existing works linking $L2$-regularization with low-rank regularization, and in particular, explain why such regularization on the matrix product affects early stages of training.
Based on these theoretical insights, we verify empirically that the key-query and value-projection matrix products $W_K^TW_Q, PW_V$ within attention layers, when optimized with weight decay, as usually done in vision tasks and language modelling, indeed induce a significant reduction in the rank of $W_K^TW_Q$ and $PW_V$, even in fully online training.
We find that, in accordance with existing work, inducing low rank in attention matrix products can damage language model performance, and observe advantages when decoupling weight decay in attention layers from the rest of the parameters.60:T54f,Recent research has shown that representation learning models may accidentally memorize their training data. For example, the déjà vu method shows that for certain representation learning models and training images, it is sometimes possible to correctly predict the foreground label given only the representation of he background – better than through dataset-level correlations. However, their measurement method requires training two models – one to estimate dataset-level correlations and the other to estimate memorization. This multiple model setup becomes infeasible for large open-source models. In this work, we propose alter native simple methods to estimate dataset-level correlations, and show that these can be used to approximate an off-the-shelf model’s memorization ability without any retraining. This enables, for the first time, the measurement of memorization in pre-trained open-source image representation and vision-language models. Our results show that different ways of measuring memorization yield very similar aggregate results. We also find that open-source models typically have lower aggregate memorization than similar models trained on a subset of the data. The code is available both for vision (https://github.com/facebookresearch/DejaVuOSS) and vision language (https://github.com/facebookresearch/VLMDejaVu) models.61:T508,We investigate the extent to which contemporary Large Language Models (LLMs) can engage in exploration, a core capability in reinforcement learning and decision making. We focus on native performance of existing LLMs, without training interventions. We deploy LLMs as agents in simple multi-armed bandit environments, specifying the environment description and interaction history entirely in-context, i.e., within the LLM prompt. We experiment with GPT-3.5, GPT-4, and Llama2, using a variety of prompt designs, and find that the models do not robustly engage in exploration without substantial interventions: i) Only one configuration resulted in satisfactory exploratory behavior: GPT-4 with chain-of-thought reasoning and an externally summarized interaction history; ii) All other configurations did not result in robust exploratory behavior, including those with chain-of-thought reasoning but unsummarized history. While these findings can be interpreted positively, they suggest that external summarization—which may not be possible in more complex settings—is essential for desirable LLM behavior. We conclude that non-trivial algorithmic interventions, such as fine-tuning or dataset curation, may be required to empower LLM-based decision making agents in complex settings.62:T730,Although humans inherently have diverse values, current large language model (LLM) alignment methods often assume that aligning LLMs with the general public's preferences is optimal. A major challenge in adopting a more individualized approach to LLM alignment is its lack of scalability, as it involves repeatedly acquiring preference data and training new reward models and LLMs for each individual's preferences. To address these challenges, we propose a new paradigm where users specify what they value most within the system message, steering the LLM's generation behavior to better align with the user's intentions. However, a naive application of such an approach is non-trivial since LLMs are typically trained on a uniform system message (e.g.,"You are a helpful assistant") which limits their ability to generalize to diverse, unseen system messages. To improve this generalization, we create the Multifaceted Collection, a preference dataset with 192k combinations of values beyond generic helpfulness and harmlessness, spanning 65k user instructions. Using this dataset, we train a 7B LLM called Janus and test it on 921 prompts from 5 benchmarks (AlpacaEval 2.0, FLASK, Koala, MT-Bench, and Self-Instruct) by adding various unseen system messages that reflect user preferences. Janus achieves tie+win rate of 75.2%, 72.4%, and 66.4% against Mistral 7B Instruct v0.2, GPT-3.5 Turbo, and GPT-4, respectively. Unexpectedly, on three benchmarks focused on response helpfulness (AlpacaEval 2.0, MT-Bench, Arena Hard Auto v0.1), Janus also outperforms LLaMA 3 8B Instruct by a +4.0%, +0.1%, +3.0% margin, underscoring that training with a vast array of system messages could also enhance alignment to the general public's preference as well. Our code, dataset, benchmark, and models are available at https://github.com/kaistAI/Janus.63:T4ef,Alignment is a procedure to fine-tune pre-trained large language models (LLMs) to follow natural language instructions and serve as helpful AI assistants. 
We have observed, however, that the conventional alignment process fails to enhance the factual accuracy of LLMs, and often leads to the generation of more false facts (i.e., *hallucination*). 
In this paper, we study how to make the LLM alignment process more factual, by first identifying factors that lead to hallucination in both alignment steps: supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement learning (RL).
In particular, we find that training the LLM on new or unfamiliar knowledge can encourage hallucination.
This makes SFT less factual as it trains on human-labeled data that may be novel to the LLM. 
Furthermore, reward functions used in standard RL often inadequately capture factuality and favor longer and more detailed responses, which inadvertently promote hallucination.
Based on these observations, we propose *FactuaLity-aware AlignMEnt*, comprised of *factuality-aware SFT* and *factuality-aware RL* through direct preference optimization. 
Experiments show that our proposed *FLAME* guides LLMs to output more factual responses while maintaining their instruction-following capability.64:T51f,Instruction tuning (IT) is crucial to tailoring large language models (LLMs) towards human-centric interactions. Recent advancements have shown that the careful selection of a small, high-quality subset of IT data can significantly enhance the performance of LLMs.  Despite this, common approaches often rely on additional models or data, which increases costs and limits widespread adoption. In this work, we propose a novel approach, termed $\textit{SelectIT}$, that capitalizes on the foundational capabilities of the LLM itself. Specifically, we exploit the intrinsic uncertainty present in LLMs to more effectively select high-quality IT data, without the need for extra resources.  Furthermore, we introduce a curated IT dataset, the $\textit{Selective Alpaca}$, created by applying SelectIT to the Alpaca-GPT4 dataset. Empirical results demonstrate that IT using Selective Alpaca leads to substantial model ability enhancement. The robustness of SelectIT has also been corroborated in various foundation models and domain-specific tasks.  Our findings suggest that longer and more computationally intensive IT data may serve as superior sources of IT, offering valuable insights for future research in this area.  Data, code, and scripts are freely available at https://github.com/Blue-Raincoat/SelectIT.65:T870,A critical approach for efficiently deploying computationally demanding large language models (LLMs) is Key-Value (KV) caching. The KV cache stores key-value states of previously generated tokens, significantly reducing the need for repetitive computations and thereby lowering latency in autoregressive generation. However, the size of the KV cache grows linearly with sequence length, posing challenges for applications requiring long context input and extensive sequence generation. In this paper, we present a simple yet effective approach, called MiniCache, to compress the KV cache across layers from a novel depth perspective, significantly reducing the memory footprint for LLM inference. Our approach is based on the observation that KV cache states exhibit high similarity between the adjacent layers in the middle-to-deep portion of LLMs. To facilitate merging, we propose disentangling the states into the magnitude and direction components, interpolating the directions of the state vectors while preserving their lengths unchanged. Furthermore, we introduce a token retention strategy to keep highly distinct state pairs unmerged, thus preserving the information with minimal additional storage overhead. Our MiniCache is training-free and general, complementing existing KV cache compression strategies, such as quantization and sparsity.  We conduct a comprehensive evaluation of MiniCache utilizing various models including LLaMA-2, LLaMA-3, Phi-3, Mistral, and Mixtral across multiple benchmarks, demonstrating its exceptional performance in achieving superior compression ratios and high throughput. On the ShareGPT dataset, LLaMA-2-7B with cross-layer merging achieves a compression ratio of $1.53\times$. Additionally, since MiniCache is orthogonal to existing quantization techniques, it can achieve a compression ratio of up to $5.02\times$ when combined with the 4-bit quantization technique, enhancing inference throughput by approximately $5\times$ and reducing the memory footprint by $41\%$ compared to the FP16 full cache baseline, all while maintaining near-lossless performance. Project is available at https://minicache.vmv.re .66:T75a,Aligning generative models with human preference via RLHF typically suffers from overoptimization, where an imperfectly learned reward model can misguide the generative model to output even undesired responses. We investigate this problem in a principled manner by identifying the source of the issue as the distributional shift and uncertainty of human preference in dataset. To mitigate overoptimization, we first propose a theoretical algorithm which optimizes the policy against an adversarially chosen reward model, one that simultaneously minimizes its MLE loss and a reward penalty term. The penalty pessimistically biases the uncertain rewards so as to prevent the policy from choosing actions with spursiouly high proxy rewards, resulting in provable sample efficiency of the algorithm under a partial coverage style condition. Moving from theory to practice, the proposed algorithm further enjoys an equivalent but surprisingly easy to implement form. With a clever usage of the equivalence between reward models and the corresponding optimal policy, the algorithm features a simple objective that combines (i) a preference optimization loss that directly aligns the policy with human preference, and (ii) a supervised learning loss which explicitly imitates the policy with a baseline distribution. In the context of aligning large language models (LLM), this objective fuses the direct preference optimization (DPO) loss with the supervised fune-tuning (SFT) loss to help mitigate the overoptimization towards undesired responses, for which we name the algorithm Regularized Preference Optimization (RPO).
Experiments of aligning LLMs demonstrate the improved performance of our method when compared with DPO baselines. 
Our work sheds light on the interplay between preference optimization and SFT in tuning LLMs with both theoretical guarantees and empirical evidence.67:T6fe,Speculative decoding has demonstrated its effectiveness in accelerating the inference of large language models (LLMs) while maintaining an identical sampling distribution. However, the conventional approach of training separate draft model to achieve a satisfactory token acceptance rate can be costly and impractical. In this paper, we propose a novel self-speculative decoding framework \emph{Kangaroo} with \emph{double} early exiting strategy, which leverages the shallow sub-network and the \texttt{LM Head} of the well-trained target LLM to construct a self-drafting model. Then, the self-verification stage only requires computing the remaining layers over the \emph{early-exited} hidden states in parallel. To bridge the representation gap between the sub-network and the full model, we train a lightweight and efficient adapter module on top of the sub-network. One significant challenge that comes with the proposed method is that the inference latency of the self-draft model may no longer be negligible compared to the big model. To boost the token acceptance rate while minimizing the latency of the self-drafting model, we introduce an additional \emph{early exiting} mechanism for both single-sequence and the tree decoding scenarios. Specifically, we dynamically halt the small model's subsequent prediction during the drafting phase once the confidence level for the current step falls below a certain threshold. This approach reduces unnecessary computations and improves overall efficiency. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks demonstrate our effectiveness, where Kangaroo achieves walltime speedups up to 2.04$\times$, outperforming Medusa-1 with 88.7\% fewer additional parameters. The code for Kangaroo is available at https://github.com/Equationliu/Kangaroo.68:T59e,Recent work demonstrates that, post-training large language models with open-domain instruction following data have achieved colossal success. Simultaneously, human Chatbot Arena has emerged as one of the most reasonable benchmarks for model evaluation and developmental guidance. However, the processes of manually curating high-quality training data and utilizing online human evaluation platforms are both expensive and limited. To mitigate the manual and temporal costs associated with post-training, this paper introduces a Simulated Chatbot Arena named WizardArena , which is fully based on and powered by open-source LLMs. For evaluation scenario, WizardArena can efficiently predict accurate performance rankings among different models based on offline test set. For the training scenario, we propose Arena Learning , an innovative offline strategy that simulates iterative arena battles among various state-of-the-art models on a large scale of instruction data using AI-driven annotations to evaluate and leverage battle results, thus continuously enhancing the weaknesses of the target model through both supervised fine-tuning and reinforcement learning. Experimental results demonstrate that our WizardArena aligns closely with the online human arena rankings, and our models, trained on extensive offline battle data through Arena Learning, demonstrate marked improvements in performance across the SFT, DPO, and PPO stages.69:T48c,Large language models (LLMs), although having revolutionized many fields, still suffer from the challenging extrapolation problem, where the inference ability of LLMs sharply declines beyond their max training lengths. In this work, we conduct a theoretical analysis to better understand why No Position Encoding (NoPE) fails outside its effective range, as well as examining the power of Position Encoding (PE) in this context. Our findings reveal that with meticulous weave position, PE can indeed be extended beyond effective range. Our theorems establish that LLMs equipped with weave PE can achieve improved extrapolation performance without additional cost. Furthermore, we introduce a novel weave PE method, Mesa-Extrapolation, which utilizes a chunk-based triangular attention matrix and applies Stair PE to manage the final chunk. This method not only retains competitive performance but also offers substantial benefits such as significantly reduced memory demand and faster inference speed. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of Mesa-Extrapolation, demonstrating its potential as a scalable solution to enhancing LLMs’ applicative reach.6a:T6f4,The proliferation of large language models (LLMs) in the real world has come with a rise in copyright cases against companies for training their models on unlicensed data from the internet. Recent works have presented methods to identify if individual text sequences were members of the model's training data, known as membership inference attacks (MIAs). We demonstrate that the apparent success of these MIAs is confounded by selecting non-members (text sequences not used for training) belonging to a different distribution from the members (e.g., temporally shifted recent Wikipedia articles compared with ones used to train the model). This distribution shift makes membership inference appear successful. However, most MIA methods perform no better than random guessing when discriminating between members and non-members from the same distribution (e.g., in this case, the same period of time). Even when MIAs work, we find that different MIAs succeed at inferring membership of samples from different distributions. Instead, we propose a new dataset inference method to accurately identify the datasets used to train large language models. This paradigm sits realistically in the modern-day copyright landscape, where authors claim that an LLM is trained over multiple documents (such as a book) written by them, rather than one particular paragraph. While dataset inference shares many of the challenges of membership inference, we solve it by selectively combining the MIAs that provide positive signal for a given distribution, and aggregating them to perform a statistical test on a given dataset. Our approach successfully distinguishes the train and test sets of different subsets of the Pile with statistically significant p-values<0.1, without any false positives.6b:T514,In recent years, transformer-based models have revolutionized deep learning, particularly in sequence modeling. To better understand this phenomenon, there is a growing interest in using Markov input processes to study transformers. However, our current understanding in this regard remains limited with many fundamental questions about how transformers learn Markov chains still unanswered. In this paper, we address this by focusing on first-order Markov chains and single-layer transformers, providing a comprehensive characterization of the learning dynamics in this context. Specifically, we prove that transformer parameters trained on next-token prediction loss can either converge to global or local minima, contingent on the initialization and the Markovian data properties, and we characterize the precise conditions under which this occurs. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first result of its kind highlighting the role of initialization. We further demonstrate that our theoretical findings are corroborated by empirical evidence. Based on these insights, we provide guidelines for the initialization of transformer parameters and demonstrate their effectiveness. Finally, we outline several open problems in this arena. Code is available at: https://github.com/Bond1995/Markov.6c:T592,There has been significant interest in "extreme" compression of large language models (LLMs), i.e. to 1-2 bits per parameter, which allows such models to be executed efficiently on resource-constrained devices.  
Existing work focused on improved one-shot quantization techniques and weight representations; yet, purely post-training  approaches are reaching diminishing returns in terms of the accuracy-vs-bit-width trade-off. State-of-the-art quantization methods such as QuIP# and AQLM include fine-tuning (part of) the compressed parameters over a limited amount of calibration data; however, such fine-tuning techniques over compressed weights often make exclusive use of straight-through estimators (STE), whose performance is not well-understood in this setting. 
In this work, we question the use of STE for extreme LLM compression, showing that it can be sub-optimal, and perform a systematic study of quantization-aware fine-tuning strategies for LLMs.
We propose PV-Tuning - a representation-agnostic framework that generalizes and improves upon existing fine-tuning strategies, and provides convergence guarantees in restricted cases.
On the practical side, when used for 1-2 bit vector quantization, PV-Tuning outperforms prior techniques for highly-performant models such as Llama and Mistral. 
Using PV-Tuning, we achieve the first Pareto-optimal quantization for Llama-2 family models at  2 bits per parameter.6d:T40a,The poor performance of transformers on arithmetic tasks seems to stem in large part from their inability to keep track of the exact position of each digit inside of a large span of digits. We mend this problem by adding an embedding to each digit that encodes its position relative to the start of the number. In addition to the boost these embeddings provide on their own, we show that this fix enables architectural modifications such as input injection and recurrent layers to improve performance even further.

With positions resolved, we can study the logical extrapolation ability of transformers. Can they solve arithmetic problems that are larger and more complex than those in their training data? We find that training on only 20 digit numbers with a single GPU for one day, we can reach state-of-the-art performance, achieving up to 99% accuracy on 100 digit addition problems. Finally, we show that these gains in numeracy also unlock improvements on other multi-step reasoning tasks including sorting and multiplication.6e:T440,Large language models (LLMs) are capable of solving a wide range of tasks, yet they have struggled with reasoning.
To address this, we propose $\textbf{Additional Logic Training (ALT)}$, which aims to enhance LLMs' reasoning capabilities by program-generated logical reasoning samples.
We first establish principles for designing high-quality samples by integrating symbolic logic theory and previous empirical insights.
Then, based on these principles, we construct a synthetic corpus named $\textbf{Formal} \ \textbf{Logic} \ \textbf{\textit{D}eduction} \ \textbf{\textit{D}iverse}$ (FLD$ _{\times2}$), comprising numerous samples of multi-step deduction with unknown facts, diverse reasoning rules, diverse linguistic expressions, and challenging distractors.
Finally, we empirically show that ALT on FLD$ _{\times2}$ substantially enhances the reasoning capabilities of state-of-the-art LLMs, including LLaMA-3.1-70B.
Improvements include gains of up to 30 points on logical reasoning benchmarks, up to 10 points on math and coding benchmarks, and 5 points on the benchmark suite BBH.6f:T4f2,Reinforcement learning based fine-tuning of large language models (LLMs) on human preferences has been shown to enhance both their capabilities and safety behavior.
  However, in cases related to safety, without precise instructions to human annotators, the data collected may cause the model to become overly cautious, or to respond in an undesirable style, such as being judgmental.
  Additionally, as model capabilities and usage patterns evolve, there may be a costly need to add or relabel data to modify safety behavior. 
  We propose a novel preference modeling approach that utilizes AI feedback and only requires a small amount of human data. 
  Our method, Rule Based Rewards (RBR), uses a collection of rules for desired or undesired behaviors (e.g. refusals should not be judgmental) along with a LLM grader.
  In contrast to prior methods using AI feedback, our method uses fine-grained, composable, LLM-graded few-shot prompts as reward directly in RL training, resulting in greater control, accuracy and ease of updating.
  We show that RBRs are an effective training method, achieving an F1 score of 97.1, compared to a human-feedback baseline of 91.7, resulting in much higher safety-behavior accuracy through better balancing usefulness and safety.70:T767,Techniques that learn improved representations via offline data or self-supervised objectives have shown impressive results in traditional reinforcement learning.
Nevertheless, it is unclear how improved representation learning can benefit reinforcement learning from human feedback on language models.
In this work, we propose training reward models (RMs) in a contrastive, $\textit{goal-conditioned}$ fashion by increasing the representation similarity of future states along sampled preferred trajectories and decreasing the similarity along randomly sampled dispreferred trajectories.
This objective significantly improves reward model performance by up to 0.09 AUROC across challenging benchmarks, such as MATH and GSM8k. These findings extend to general alignment as well -- on the Helpful-Harmless dataset, we observe 2.3\% increase in accuracy.
Beyond improving reward model performance, we show this way of training RM representations enables improved steerability because it allows us to evaluate the likelihood of an action achieving a particular goal-state (e.g. whether a solution is correct or helpful).
Leveraging this insight, we find that we can filter up to 55\% of generated tokens during majority voting by discarding trajectories likely to end up in an "incorrect" state, which leads to significant cost savings.
We additionally find that these representations can perform fine-grained control by conditioning on desired future goal-states.
For example, we show that steering a Llama 3 model towards helpful generations with our approach improves helpfulness by $9.6$\% over a supervised-fine-tuning trained baseline.
Similarly, steering the model towards complex generations improves complexity by $21.6$\% over the baseline.
Overall, we find that training RMs in this contrastive, goal-conditioned fashion significantly improves performance and enables model steerability.71:T4d9,Transformer based large-language models (LLMs) display extreme proficiency with language yet a precise understanding of how they work remains elusive. One way of demystifying transformer predictions would be to describe how they depend on their context in terms of simple template functions. This paper takes a first step in this direction by considering families of functions (i.e. rules) formed out of simple N-gram based statistics of the training data. By studying how well these rulesets approximate transformer predictions, we obtain a variety of novel discoveries: a simple method to detect overfitting during training without using a holdout set, a quantitative measure of how transformers progress from learning simple to more complex statistical rules over the course of training, a model-variance criterion governing when transformer predictions tend to be described by N-gram rules, and insights into how well transformers can be approximated by N-gram rulesets in the limit where these rulesets become increasingly complex. In this latter direction, we find that for 79% and 68% of LLM next-token distributions on TinyStories and Wikipedia, respectively, their top-1 predictions agree with those provided by our N-gram rulesets.72:T662,Safety alignment is crucial to ensure that large language models (LLMs) behave in ways that align with human preferences and prevent harmful actions during inference. However, recent studies show that the alignment can be easily compromised through finetuning with only a few adversarially designed training examples. We aim to measure the risks in finetuning LLMs through navigating the LLM safety landscape. We discover a new phenomenon observed universally in the model parameter space of popular open-source LLMs, termed as “safety basin”: random perturbations to model weights maintain the safety level of the original aligned model within its local neighborhood. However, outside this local region, safety is fully compromised, exhibiting a sharp, step-like drop. This safety basin contrasts sharply with the LLM capability landscape, where model performance peaks at the origin and gradually declines as random perturbation increases. Our discovery inspires us to propose the new VISAGE safety metric that measures the safety in LLM finetuning by probing its safety landscape. Visualizing the safety landscape of the aligned model enables us to understand how finetuning compromises safety by dragging the model away from the safety basin. The LLM safety landscape also highlights the system prompt’s critical role in protecting a model, and that such protection transfers to its perturbed variants within the safety basin. These observations from our safety landscape research provide new
insights for future work on LLM safety community. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/ShengYun-Peng/llm-landscape.73:T4b9,Large Transformer networks are increasingly used in settings where low inference latency is necessary to enable new applications and improve the end-user experience.
However, autoregressive inference is resource intensive and requires parallelism for efficiency.
Parallelism introduces collective communication that is both expensive and represents a phase when hardware resources are underutilized.
Towards mitigating this, Kraken is an evolution of the standard Transformer architecture that is designed to complement existing tensor parallelism schemes for efficient inference on multi-device systems.
By introducing a fixed degree of intra-layer model parallelism, the architecture allows collective operations to be overlapped with compute, decreasing latency and increasing hardware utilization.
When trained on OpenWebText, Kraken models reach a similar perplexity as standard Transformers while also preserving their language modeling capabilities as evaluated on the SuperGLUE benchmark.
Importantly, when tested on multi-GPU systems using TensorRT-LLM engines, Kraken speeds up Time To First Token by a mean of 35.6% across a range of model sizes, context lengths, and degrees of tensor parallelism.74:T4d9,Pipeline parallelism has been widely explored, but most existing schedules lack a systematic methodology. In this paper, we propose a framework to decompose pipeline schedules as repeating a building block, and show that the lifespan of the building block decides the peak activation memory of the pipeline schedule. Guided by the observations, we find that almost all existing pipeline schedules, to the best of our knowledge, are memory inefficient. To address this, we introduce a family of memory efficient building blocks with controllable activation memory, which can reduce the peak activation memory to 1/2 of 1F1B without sacrificing efficiency, and even to 1/3 with comparable throughput. We can also achieve almost zero pipeline bubbles while maintaining the same activation memory as 1F1B. Our evaluations demonstrate that in pure pipeline parallelism settings, our methods outperform 1F1B by from 7\% to 55\% in terms of throughput. When employing a grid search over hybrid parallelism hyperparameters in practical scenarios, our methods demonstrate a 16\% throughput improvement over the 1F1B baseline for large language models. The implementation is open-sourced at https://github.com/sail-sg/zero-bubble-pipeline-parallelism.75:T4e6,Large language models (LLMs) trained on web-scale datasets raise substantial concerns regarding permissible data usage. One major question is whether these models"memorize"all their training data or they integrate many data sources in some way more akin to how a human would learn and synthesize information. The answer hinges, to a large degree, on how we define memorization. In this work, we propose the Adversarial Compression Ratio (ACR) as a metric for assessing memorization in LLMs. A given string from the training data is considered memorized if it can be elicited by a prompt (much) shorter than the string itself -- in other words, if these strings can be"compressed"with the model by computing adversarial prompts of fewer tokens. The ACR overcomes the limitations of existing notions of memorization by (i) offering an adversarial view of measuring memorization, especially for monitoring unlearning and compliance; and (ii) allowing for the flexibility to measure memorization for arbitrary strings at a reasonably low compute. Our definition serves as a practical tool for determining when model owners may be violating terms around data usage, providing a potential legal tool and a critical lens through which to address such scenarios.76:T687,Training on model-generated synthetic data is a promising approach for finetuning LLMs, but it remains unclear when it helps or hurts. In this paper, we investigate this question for math reasoning via an empirical study, followed by building a conceptual understanding of our observations. First, we find that while the typical approach of finetuning a model on synthetic correct or positive problem-solution pairs generated by capable models offers modest performance gains, sampling more correct solutions from the finetuned learner itself followed by subsequent fine-tuning on this self-generated data $\textbf{doubles}$ the efficiency of the same synthetic problems. At the same time, training on model-generated positives can amplify various spurious correlations, resulting in flat or even inverse scaling trends as the amount of data increases. Surprisingly, we find that several of these issues can be addressed if we also utilize negative responses, i.e., model-generated responses that are deemed incorrect by a final answer verifier. Crucially, these negatives must be constructed such that the training can appropriately recover the utility or advantage of each intermediate step in the negative response. With this per-step scheme, we are able to attain consistent gains over only positive data, attaining performance similar to amplifying the amount of synthetic data by $\mathbf{8 \times}$. We show that training on per-step negatives can help to unlearn spurious correlations in the positive data, and is equivalent to advantage-weighted reinforcement learning (RL), implying that it inherits robustness benefits of RL over imitating positive data alone.77:T654,Causal language modeling using the Transformer architecture has yielded remarkable capabilities in Large Language Models (LLMs) over the last few years. However, the extent to which fundamental search and reasoning capabilities emerged within LLMs remains a topic of ongoing debate. In this work, we study if causal language modeling can learn a complex task such as solving Sudoku puzzles. To solve a Sudoku, the model is first required to search over all empty cells of the puzzle to decide on a cell to fill and then apply an appropriate strategy to fill the decided cell. Sometimes, the application of a strategy only results in thinning down the possible values in a cell rather than concluding the exact value of the cell. In such cases, multiple strategies are applied one after the other to fill a single cell. We observe that Transformer models trained on this synthetic task can indeed learn to solve Sudokus (our model solves $94.21\%$ of the puzzles fully correctly) when trained on a logical sequence of steps taken by a solver. We find that training Transformers with the logical sequence of steps is necessary and without such training, they fail to learn Sudoku. We also extend our analysis to Zebra puzzles (known as Einstein puzzles) and show that the model solves $92.04 \%$ of the puzzles fully correctly. In addition, we study the internal representations of the trained Transformer and find that through linear probing, we can decode information about the set of possible values in any given cell from them, pointing to the presence of a strong reasoning engine implicit in the Transformer weights.78:T429,What computational structure are we building into large language models when we train them on next-token prediction? Here, we present evidence that this structure is given by the meta-dynamics of belief updating over hidden states of the data- generating process. Leveraging the theory of optimal prediction, we anticipate and then find that belief states are linearly represented in the residual stream of transformers, even in cases where the predicted belief state geometry has highly nontrivial fractal structure. We investigate cases where the belief state geometry is represented in the final residual stream or distributed across the residual streams of multiple layers, providing a framework to explain these observations. Furthermore we demonstrate that the inferred belief states contain information about the entire future, beyond the local next-token prediction that the transformers are explicitly trained on. Our work provides a general framework connecting the structure of training data to the geometric structure of activations inside transformers.79:T53d,Large Language Models (LLMs) have long held sway in the realms of artificial intelligence research.
Numerous efficient techniques, including weight pruning, quantization, and distillation, have been embraced to compress LLMs, targeting memory reduction and inference acceleration, which underscore the redundancy  in LLMs.
However, most model compression techniques concentrate on weight optimization, overlooking the exploration of optimal architectures.
Besides, traditional architecture search methods, limited by the elevated complexity with extensive parameters, struggle to demonstrate their effectiveness on LLMs.
In this paper, we propose a training-free architecture search framework to identify optimal subnets that preserve the fundamental strengths of the original LLMs while achieving inference acceleration.
Furthermore, after generating subnets that inherit specific weights from the original LLMs, we introduce a reformation algorithm that utilizes the omitted weights to rectify the inherited weights  with a small amount of calibration data.
Compared with SOTA training-free structured pruning works that can generate smaller networks, our method demonstrates superior performance across standard benchmarks.
Furthermore, our generated subnets can directly reduce the usage of GPU memory and achieve inference acceleration.7a:T625,Many applications today provide users with multiple auto-complete drafts as they type, including GitHub's code completion, Gmail's smart compose, and Apple's messaging auto-suggestions. Under the hood, language models support this by running an autoregressive inference pass to provide a draft. Consequently, providing $k$ drafts to the user requires running an expensive language model $k$ times. To alleviate the computation cost of running $k$ inference passes, we propose Superposed Decoding, a new decoding algorithm that generates $k$ drafts at the computation cost of one autoregressive inference pass. We achieve this by feeding a superposition of the most recent token embeddings from the $k$ drafts as input to the next decoding step of the language model. At every inference step we combine the $k$ drafts with the top-$k$ tokens to get $k^2$ new drafts and cache the $k$ most likely options, using an n-gram interpolation with minimal compute overhead to filter out incoherent generations. Our experiments show that $k$ drafts from Superposed Decoding are at least as coherent and factual as Nucleus Sampling and Greedy Decoding respectively, while being at least $2.44\times$ faster for $k\ge3$. In a compute-normalized setting, user evaluations demonstrably favor text generated by Superposed Decoding over Nucleus Sampling. Superposed Decoding can also be combined with other decoding strategies, resulting in universal coverage gains when scaling inference time compute. Code and more examples open-sourced at https://github.com/RAIVNLab/SuperposedDecoding.7b:T4f4,Open-source Large Language Models (LLMs) and their specialized variants, particularly Code LLMs, have recently delivered impressive performance. However, previous Code LLMs are typically fine-tuned on single-source data with limited quality and diversity, which may insufficiently elicit the potential of pre-trained Code LLMs. In this paper, we present AlchemistCoder, a series of Code LLMs with enhanced code generation and generalization capabilities fine-tuned on multi-source data. To achieve this, we pioneer to unveil inherent conflicts among the various styles and qualities in multi-source code corpora and introduce data-specific prompts with hindsight relabeling, termed AlchemistPrompts, to harmonize different data sources and instruction-response pairs. Additionally, we propose incorporating the data construction process into the fine-tuning data as code comprehension tasks, including instruction evolution, data filtering, and code review. Extensive experiments demonstrate that AlchemistCoder holds a clear lead among all models of the same size (6.7B/7B) and rivals or even surpasses larger models (15B/33B/70B), showcasing the efficacy of our method in refining instruction-following capabilities and advancing the boundaries of code intelligence.7c:T4e4,Despite their widespread use, the mechanisms by which large language models (LLMs) represent and regulate uncertainty in next-token predictions remain largely unexplored. This study investigates two critical components believed to influence this uncertainty: the recently discovered entropy neurons and a new set of components that we term token frequency neurons. Entropy neurons are characterized by an unusually high weight norm and influence the final layer normalization (LayerNorm) scale to effectively scale down the logits. Our work shows that entropy neurons operate by writing onto an unembedding null space, allowing them to impact the residual stream norm with minimal direct effect on the logits themselves. We observe the presence of entropy neurons across a range of models, up to 7 billion parameters. On the other hand, token frequency neurons, which we discover and describe here for the first time, boost or suppress each token's logit proportionally to its log frequency, thereby shifting the output distribution towards or away from the unigram distribution. Finally, we present a detailed case study where entropy neurons actively manage confidence in the setting of induction, i.e. detecting and continuing repeated subsequences.7d:T61f,Large language models (LLMs) are trained on a deluge of text data with limited quality control. As a result, LLMs can exhibit unintended or even harmful behaviours, such as leaking information, fake news or hate speech. Countermeasures, commonly referred to as preference alignment, include fine-tuning the pretrained LLMs with carefully crafted text examples of desired behaviour. Even then, empirical evidence shows preference aligned LLMs can be enticed to harmful behaviour. This so called jailbreaking of LLMs is typically achieved by adversarially modifying the input prompt to the LLM. Our paper provides theoretical insights into the phenomenon of preference alignment and jailbreaking from a statistical perspective. Under our framework, we first show that pretrained LLMs will mimic harmful behaviour if present in the training corpus. Under that same framework, we then introduce a statistical notion of alignment, and lower-bound the jailbreaking probability, showing that it is unpreventable under reasonable assumptions. Based on our insights, we propose an alteration to the currently prevalent alignment strategy RLHF. Specifically, we introduce a simple modification to the RLHF objective, we call E-RLHF, that aims to increase the likelihood of safe responses. E-RLHF brings no additional training cost, and is compatible with other methods. Empirically, we demonstrate that E-RLHF outperforms RLHF on all alignment problems put forward by the AdvBench and HarmBench project without sacrificing model performance as measured by the MT-Bench project.7e:T615,Current AI alignment methodologies rely on human-provided demonstrations or judgments, and the learned capabilities of AI systems would be upper-bounded by human capabilities as a result. This raises a challenging research question: How can we keep improving the systems when their capabilities have surpassed the levels of humans? This paper answers this question in the context of tackling hard reasoning tasks (e.g., level 4-5 MATH problems) via learning from human annotations on easier tasks (e.g., level 1-3 MATH problems), which we term as easy-to-hard generalization. Our key insight is that an evaluator (reward model) trained on supervisions for easier tasks can be effectively used for scoring candidate solutions of harder tasks and hence facilitating easy-to-hard generalization over different levels of tasks. Based on this insight, we propose a novel approach to scalable alignment, which firstly trains the (process-supervised) reward models on easy problems (e.g., level 1-3), and then uses them to evaluate the performance of policy models on hard problems. We show that such easy-to-hard generalization from evaluators can enable easy-to-hard generalizations in generators either through re-ranking or reinforcement learning (RL). Notably, our process-supervised 7b RL model and 34b model (reranking@1024) achieves an accuracy of 34.0% and 52.5% on MATH500, respectively, despite only using human supervision on easy problems. Our approach suggests a promising path toward AI systems that advance beyond the frontier of human supervision.7f:T4c4,Transformer models can face practical limitations due to their high computational requirements. At the same time, such models exhibit significant activation sparsity, which can be leveraged to reduce the inference cost by converting parts of the network into equivalent Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) layers. Despite the crucial role played by activation sparsity, its impact on this process remains unexplored. We demonstrate that the efficiency of the conversion can be significantly enhanced by a proper regularization of the activation sparsity of the base model. Moreover, motivated by the high variance of the number of activated neurons for different inputs, we introduce a more effective dynamic-$k$ expert selection rule that adjusts the number of executed experts on a per-token basis. To achieve further savings, we extend this approach to multi-head attention projections. Finally, we develop an efficient implementation that translates these computational savings into actual wall-clock speedup. The proposed method, Dense to Dynamic-$k$ Mixture-of-Experts (D2DMoE), outperforms existing approaches on common NLP and vision tasks, reducing inference cost by up to 60\% without significantly impacting performance.80:T676,Large Language Models (LLMs) are typically trained to predict in the forward direction of time. However, recent works have shown that prompting these models to look back and critique their own generations can produce useful feedback. Motivated by this, we explore the question of whether LLMs can be empowered to think (predict and score) backwards to provide unsupervised feedback that complements forward LLMs. Towards this, we introduce Time Reversed Language Models (TRLMs), which can score and generate queries when conditioned on responses, effectively functioning in the reverse direction of time. Further, to effectively infer in the response to query direction, we pre-train and fine-tune a language model (TRLM-Ba) in the reverse token order from scratch. We show empirically (and theoretically in a stylized setting) that time-reversed models can indeed complement forward model predictions when used to score the query given response for re-ranking multiple forward generations. We obtain up to 5\% improvement on the widely used AlpacaEval Leaderboard over the competent baseline of best-of-N re-ranking using self log-perplexity scores. We further show that TRLM scoring outperforms conventional forward scoring of response given query, resulting in significant gains in applications such as citation generation and passage retrieval. We next leverage the generative ability of TRLM to augment or provide unsupervised feedback to input safety filters of LLMs, demonstrating a drastic reduction in false negative rate with negligible impact on false positive rates against several attacks published on the popular JailbreakBench leaderboard.81:T456,Recent research has demonstrated that transformers, particularly linear attention models, implicitly execute gradient-descent-like algorithms on data provided in-context during their forward inference step. However, their capability in handling more complex problems remains unexplored. In this paper, we prove that each layer of a linear transformer maintains a weight vector for an implicit linear regression problem and can be interpreted as performing a variant of preconditioned gradient descent. We also investigate the use of linear transformers in a challenging scenario where the training data is corrupted with different levels of noise. Remarkably, we demonstrate that for this problem linear transformers discover an intricate and highly effective optimization algorithm, surpassing or matching in performance many reasonable baselines. We analyze this algorithm and show that it is a novel approach incorporating momentum and adaptive rescaling based on noise levels. Our findings show that even linear transformers possess the surprising ability to discover sophisticated optimization strategies.82:T601,High-quality preference datasets are essential for training reward models that can effectively guide large language models (LLMs) in generating high-quality responses aligned with human preferences.
As LLMs become stronger and better aligned, permissively licensed preference datasets, such as Open Assistant, HH-RLHF, and HelpSteer need to be updated to remain effective for reward modeling.
Methods that distil preference data from proprietary LLMs such as GPT-4 have restrictions on commercial usage imposed by model providers.
To improve upon both generated responses and attribute labeling quality, we release HelpSteer2, a permissively licensed preference dataset (CC-BY-4.0).  
Using a powerful Nemotron-4-340B base model trained on HelpSteer2, we are able to achieve the SOTA score (92.0%) on Reward-Bench's primary dataset, outperforming currently listed open and proprietary models, as of June 12th, 2024.
Notably, HelpSteer2 consists of only ten thousand response pairs, an order of magnitude fewer than existing preference datasets (e.g., HH-RLHF), which makes it highly efficient for training reward models. 
Our extensive experiments demonstrate that reward models trained with HelpSteer2 are effective in aligning LLMs. Additionally, we propose SteerLM 2.0, a model alignment approach that can effectively make use of the rich multi-attribute score predicted by our reward models. 
HelpSteer2 is available at https://huggingface.co/datasets/nvidia/HelpSteer2 and code is available at https://github.com/NVIDIA/NeMo-Aligner83:T5df,We study whether transformers can learn to *implicitly* reason over parametric knowledge, a skill that even the most capable language models struggle with. Focusing on two representative reasoning types, composition and comparison, we consistently find that transformers *can* learn implicit reasoning, but only through *grokking*, i.e., extended training far beyond overfitting. The levels of generalization also vary across reasoning types: when faced with out-of-distribution examples, transformers fail to systematically generalize for composition but succeed for comparison. We delve into the model's internals throughout training, conducting analytical experiments that reveal: 1) the mechanism behind grokking, such as the formation of the generalizing circuit and its relation to the relative efficiency of generalizing and memorizing circuits, and 2) the connection between systematicity and the configuration of the generalizing circuit. Our findings guide data and training setup to better induce implicit reasoning and suggest potential improvements to the transformer architecture, such as encouraging cross-layer knowledge sharing. Furthermore, we demonstrate that for a challenging reasoning task with a large search space, GPT-4-Turbo and Gemini-1.5-Pro based on non-parametric memory fail badly regardless of prompting styles or retrieval augmentation, while a fully grokked transformer can achieve near-perfect accuracy, showcasing the power of parametric memory for complex reasoning.84:T4ff,Inference acceleration of large language models (LLMs) has been put forward in many application scenarios and speculative decoding has shown its advantage in addressing inference acceleration. Speculative decoding usually introduces a draft model to assist the base LLM where the draft model produces drafts and the base LLM verifies the draft for acceptance or rejection. In this framework, the final inference speed is decided by the decoding speed of the draft model and the acceptance rate of the draft provided by the draft model. Currently the widely used draft models usually generate draft tokens for the next several positions in a non-autoregressive way without considering the correlations between draft tokens. Therefore, it has a high decoding speed but an unsatisfactory acceptance rate. In this paper, we focus on how to improve the performance of the draft model and aim to accelerate inference via a high acceptance rate. To this end, we propose a CTC-based draft model which strengthens the correlations between draft tokens during the draft phase, thereby generating higher-quality draft candidate sequences. Experiment results show that compared to strong baselines, the proposed method can achieve a higher acceptance rate and hence a faster inference speed.85:T5ba,Large language models (LLMs) like transformers demonstrate impressive in-context learning (ICL) capabilities, allowing them to make
predictions for new tasks based on prompt exemplars without parameter updates. While existing ICL theories often assume structured training data resembling ICL tasks (e.g., x-y pairs for linear regression), LLMs are typically trained unsupervised on unstructured text, such as web content, which lacks clear parallels to tasks like word analogy. To address this gap, we examine what enables ICL in models trained on unstructured data, focusing on critical sequence model requirements and training data structure. We find that many ICL capabilities can
emerge simply from co-occurrence of semantically related word pairs in unstructured data; word analogy completion, for example, can provably arise purely through co-occurrence modeling, using classical language models like continuous bag of words (CBOW), without needing positional information or attention mechanisms. However, positional information becomes crucial for logic reasoning tasks requiring generalization to unseen tokens. Finally, we identify two cases where ICL fails: one in logic reasoning tasks that require generalizing to new, unseen patterns, and another in analogy completion where relevant word pairs appear only in fixed training positions. These findings suggest that LLMs' ICL abilities depend heavily on the structural elements within their training data.86:T647,Self-attention is the key mechanism of transformers, which are the essential building blocks of modern foundation models. Recent studies have shown that pure self-attention suffers from an increasing degree of rank collapse as depth increases, limiting model expressivity and further utilization of model depth. The existing literature on rank collapse, however, has mostly overlooked other critical components in transformers that may alleviate the rank collapse issue. In this paper, we provide a general analysis of rank collapse under self-attention, taking into account the effects of attention masks and layer normalization (LayerNorm). In particular, we find that although pure masked attention still suffers from exponential collapse to a rank one subspace, sparse or local masked attention can provably slow down the collapse rate. In the case of self-attention with LayerNorm, we first show that for certain classes of value matrices, collapse to a rank one subspace still happens exponentially. However, through construction of nontrivial counterexamples, we then establish that with proper choice of value matrices, a general class of sequences may not converge to a rank one subspace, and the self-attention dynamics with LayerNorm can simultaneously possess a rich set of equilibria with any possible rank between one and full. Our result refutes the previous hypothesis that LayerNorm plays no role in the rank collapse of self-attention and suggests that self-attention with LayerNorm constitutes a much more expressive, versatile nonlinear dynamical system than what was originally thought.87:T415,We study the problem of aligning large language models (LLMs) with human preference data. Contrastive preference optimization has shown promising results in aligning LLMs with available preference data by optimizing the implicit reward associated with the policy. However, the contrastive objective focuses mainly on the relative values of implicit rewards associated with two responses while ignoring their actual values, resulting in suboptimal alignment with human preferences. To address this limitation, we propose calibrated direct preference optimization (Cal-DPO), a simple yet effective algorithm. We show that substantial improvement in alignment with the given preferences can be achieved simply by calibrating the implicit reward to ensure that the learned implicit rewards are comparable in scale to the ground-truth rewards. We demonstrate the theoretical advantages of Cal-DPO over existing approaches. The results of our experiments on a variety of standard benchmarks show that Cal-DPO remarkably improves off-the-shelf methods.88:T725,We introduce Lifelong ICL, a problem setting that challenges long-context language models (LMs) to learn a sequence of language tasks through in-context learning (ICL). We further introduce Task Haystack, an evaluation suite dedicated to assessing and diagnosing how long-context LMs utilizes contexts in Lifelong ICL. When given a task instruction and test inputs, long-context LMs are expected to leverage the relevant demonstrations in the Lifelong ICL prompt, avoid distraction and interference from other tasks, and achieve test accuracies that are not significantly worse than those of the Single-task ICL baseline. Task Haystack draws inspiration from the widely-adopted"needle-in-a-haystack"(NIAH) evaluation, but presents distinct new challenges. It requires models (1) to utilize the contexts at a deeper level, rather than resorting to simple copying and pasting; (2) to navigate through long streams of evolving topics and tasks, proxying the complexities and dynamism of contexts in real-world scenarios. Additionally, Task Haystack inherits the controllability of NIAH, providing model developers with tools and visualizations to identify model vulnerabilities effectively. We benchmark 14 long-context LMs using Task Haystack, finding that frontier models like GPT-4o still struggle with the setting, failing on 15% of cases on average. Most open-weight models further lack behind by a large margin, with failure rates reaching up to 61%. In our controlled analysis, we identify factors such as distraction and recency bias as contributors to these failure cases. Further, performance declines when task instructions are paraphrased at test time or when ICL demonstrations are repeated excessively, raising concerns about the robustness, instruction understanding, and true context utilization of long-context LMs.89:T5d9,In-context learning (ICL) refers to a remarkable capability of pretrained large language models, which can learn a new task given a few examples during inference. However, theoretical understanding of ICL is largely under-explored, particularly whether transformers can be trained to generalize to unseen examples in a prompt, which will require the model to acquire contextual knowledge of the prompt for generalization. This paper investigates the training dynamics of  transformers by gradient descent through the lens of non-linear regression tasks. The contextual generalization here can be attained via  learning  the template function for each task in-context, where all template functions lie in a linear space with $m$ basis functions. We analyze the training dynamics of one-layer multi-head transformers to {in-contextly} predict unlabeled inputs given partially labeled prompts, where the labels contain Gaussian noise and the number of examples in each prompt  are not sufficient to determine the template. Under mild assumptions, we show that the training loss for a one-layer multi-head transformer converges linearly to a global minimum. Moreover, the transformer effectively learns to perform ridge regression over the basis functions. To our knowledge, this study is the first provable demonstration that transformers can learn contextual (i.e., template) information to generalize to both unseen examples and tasks when prompts contain only a small number of query-answer pairs.8a:T4f7,Reward models trained on human preference data have been proven to effectively align Large Language Models (LLMs) with human intent within the framework of reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). However, current reward models have limited generalization capabilities to unseen prompts and responses, which can lead to an unexpected phenomenon known as reward over-optimization, resulting in a decline in actual performance due to excessive optimization of rewards. While previous research has advocated for constraining policy optimization, our study introduces a novel approach to enhance the reward model's generalization ability against distribution shifts by regularizing the hidden states. Specifically, we retain the base model's language model head and incorporate a suite of text-generation losses to preserve the hidden states' text-generation capabilities, while concurrently learning a reward head behind the same hidden states. Our experimental results demonstrate that the introduced regularization technique markedly improves the accuracy of learned reward models across a variety of out-of-distribution (OOD) tasks and effectively alleviates the over-optimization issue in RLHF, offering a more reliable and robust preference learning paradigm.8b:T5f3,Large Language models (LLMs) have demonstrated supreme capabilities in textual understanding and generation, but cannot be directly applied to cross-modal tasks without fine-tuning. This paper proposes a cross-modal in-context learning approach, empowering the frozen LLMs to achieve multiple audio tasks in a few-shot style without any parameter update. 
Specifically, we propose a novel LLM-driven audio codec model, LLM-Codec, which transfers the audio modality into textual space by representing audio tokens with words or sub-words from the LLM vocabulary, while maintaining high audio reconstruction quality.
The key idea is to reduce the modality heterogeneity between text and audio by compressing the audio modality into the well-trained textual space of LLMs. Thus, the audio representation can be viewed as a new \textit{foreign language}, and LLMs can learn the new \textit{foreign language} with several demonstrations. In experiments, we investigate the performance of the proposed approach across multiple audio understanding and generation tasks, \textit{e.g.} speech emotion classification, audio classification, text-to-speech generation, speech enhancement, etc. Experimental results show that LLMs equipped with the LLM-Codec, named as UniAudio 1.5, prompted by only a few examples, can perform effectively in simple scenarios, validating our cross-modal in-context learning approach.
To facilitate research on few-shot audio task learning and multi-modal LLMs, we have open-sourced the LLM-Codec model.8c:T4ac,Instruction tuning improves the reasoning abilities of large language models (LLMs), with data quality and scalability being the crucial factors. Most instruction tuning data come from human crowd-sourcing or GPT-4 distillation. We propose a paradigm to efficiently harvest 10 million naturally existing instruction data from the pre-training web corpus to enhance LLM reasoning. Our approach involves (1) recalling relevant documents, (2) extracting instruction-response pairs, and (3) refining the extracted pairs using open-source LLMs. Fine-tuning base LLMs on this dataset, we build MAmmoTH2 models, which significantly boost performance on reasoning benchmarks. Notably, MAmmoTH2-7B’s (Mistral) performance increases from 11% to 36.7% on MATH and from 36% to 68.4% on GSM8K without training on any in-domain data. Further training MAmmoTH2 on public instruction tuning datasets yields MAmmoTH2-Plus, achieving state-of-the-art performance on several reasoning and chatbot benchmarks. Our work demonstrates how to harvest large-scale, high-quality instruction data without costly human annotation or GPT-4 distillation, providing a new paradigm for building better instruction tuning data.8d:T52d,Recently, various strategies for distributed training of large language models (LLMs) have been proposed.
By categorizing them into basic strategies and composite strategies, we have discovered that existing basic strategies provide limited options in specific scenarios, leaving considerable room for optimization in training speed.
In this paper, we rethink the impact of memory and communication costs on the training speed of LLMs, taking into account the impact of intra- and inter-group communication performance disparities, and then propose a new set of basic strategies named the \textbf{Pa}rtial \textbf{R}edundancy \textbf{O}ptimizer (PaRO).
PaRO Data Parallelism (PaRO-DP) accelerates LLM training through refined model state partitioning and tailored training procedures. At the same time, PaRO Collective Communications (PaRO-CC) speeds up collective communication operations by rearranging the topology. We also propose a guideline for choosing different DP strategies based on simple quantitative calculations, which yields minimal ranking errors.
Our experiments demonstrate that PaRO improves the training speed of LLMs by up to 266\% that of ZeRO-3 as basic DP strategies.
Moreover, employing PaRO-CC independently for model parallel strategies, such as Megatron, can also boost the training speed by 17\%.8e:T5b8,Multimodal large language models (MLLMs), initiated with a trained LLM, first align images with text and then fine-tune on multimodal mixed inputs. However, during the continued training, the MLLM catastrophically forgets the text-only instructions that the initial LLM masters. In this paper, we present Wings, a novel MLLM that excels in both text-only and multimodal instructions. By examining attention across layers of MLLM, we find that *text-only forgetting* is related to the attention shifts from pre-image to post-image text. From that, we construct an additional Low-Rank Residual Attention (LoRRA) block that acts as the "modality learner" to expand the learnable space and compensate for the attention shift. The complementary learners, like "wings" on either side, are connected in parallel to each layer's attention block. The LoRRA mirrors the structure of attention but utilizes low-rank connections to ensure efficiency. Initially, image and text inputs are aligned with visual learners operating alongside the main attention, balancing focus on visual elements. Later, textual learners are integrated with token-wise routing, blending the outputs of both modality learners collaboratively. Our experimental results demonstrate that Wings outperforms equally-scaled MLLMs in both text-only and visual question-answering tasks. Wings with *compensation of learners* addresses text-only forgetting during visual modality expansion in general MLLMs.8f:T529,Speech language models have significantly advanced in generating realistic speech, with neural codec language models standing out. However, the integration of preference optimization to align speech outputs to human preferences is often neglected. This paper addresses this gap by first analyzing the distribution gap in codec language models, highlighting how it leads to discrepancies between the training and inference phases, which negatively affects performance. Then we explore leveraging preference optimization to bridge the distribution gap. We introduce SpeechAlign, an iterative self-improvement strategy that aligns speech language models to human preferences.  SpeechAlign involves constructing a preference codec dataset contrasting golden codec tokens against synthetic tokens, followed by preference optimization to improve the codec language model. This cycle of improvement is carried out iteratively to steadily convert weak models to strong ones. Through both subjective and objective evaluations, we show that SpeechAlign can bridge the distribution gap and facilitating continuous self-improvement of the speech language model. Moreover, SpeechAlign exhibits robust generalization capabilities and works for smaller models.  Demos are available at https://0nutation.github.io/SpeechAlign.github.io/.90:T54f,Recent advancements in zero-shot text-to-speech (TTS) modeling have led to significant strides in generating high-fidelity and diverse speech. However, dialogue generation, along with achieving human-like naturalness in speech, continues to be a challenge. In this paper, we introduce CoVoMix: Conversational Voice Mixture Generation, a novel model for zero-shot, human-like, multi-speaker, multi-round dialogue speech generation. CoVoMix first converts dialogue text into multiple streams of discrete tokens, with each token stream representing semantic information for individual talkers. These token streams are then fed into a flow-matching based acoustic model to generate mixed mel-spectrograms. Finally, the speech waveforms are produced using a HiFi-GAN model. Furthermore, we devise a comprehensive set of metrics for measuring the effectiveness of dialogue modeling and generation. Our experimental results show that CoVoMix can generate dialogues that are not only human-like in their naturalness and coherence but also involve multiple talkers engaging in multiple rounds of conversation. This is exemplified by instances generated in a single channel where one speaker's utterance is seamlessly mixed with another's interjections or laughter, indicating the latter's role as an attentive listener. Audio samples are enclosed in the supplementary.91:T48b,We study the \emph{in-context learning} (ICL) ability of a \emph{Linear Transformer Block} (LTB) that combines a linear attention component and a linear multi-layer perceptron (MLP) component. For ICL of linear regression with a Gaussian prior and a \emph{non-zero mean}, we show that LTB can achieve nearly Bayes optimal ICL risk. In contrast, using only linear attention must incur an irreducible additive approximation error. Furthermore, we establish a correspondence between LTB and one-step gradient descent estimators with learnable initialization ($\mathsf{GD}\text{-}\mathbf{\beta}$), in the sense that every $\mathsf{GD}\text{-}\mathbf{\beta}$ estimator can be implemented by an LTB estimator and every optimal LTB estimator that minimizes the in-class ICL risk is effectively a $\mathsf{GD}\text{-}\mathbf{\beta}$ estimator. Finally, we show that $\mathsf{GD}\text{-}\mathbf{\beta}$ estimators can be efficiently optimized with gradient flow, despite a non-convex training objective. Our results reveal that LTB achieves ICL by implementing $\mathsf{GD}\text{-}\mathbf{\beta}$, and they highlight the role of MLP layers in reducing approximation error.92:T60e,Recent methodologies in LLM self-training mostly rely on LLM generating responses and filtering those with correct output answers as training data. This approach often yields a low-quality fine-tuning training set (e.g., incorrect plans or intermediate reasoning). In this paper, we develop a reinforced self-training approach, called ReST-MCTS*, based on integrating process reward guidance with tree search MCTS* for collecting higher-quality reasoning traces as well as per-step value to train policy and reward models. ReST-MCTS* circumvents the per-step manual annotation typically used to train process rewards by tree-search-based reinforcement learning: Given oracle final correct answers, ReST-MCTS* is able to infer the correct process rewards by estimating the probability this step can help lead to the correct answer. These inferred rewards serve dual purposes: they act as value targets for further refining the process reward model and also facilitate the selection of high-quality traces for policy model self-training. We first show that the tree-search policy in ReST-MCTS* achieves higher accuracy compared with prior LLM reasoning baselines such as Best-of-N and Tree-of-Thought, within the same search budget. We then show that by using traces searched by this tree-search policy as training data, we can continuously enhance the three language models for multiple iterations, and outperform other self-training algorithms such as ReST$^\text{EM}$ and Self-Rewarding LM. We release all code at https://github.com/THUDM/ReST-MCTS.93:T755,As large language models (LLMs) become increasingly advanced, their ability to exhibit compositional generalization -- the capacity to combine learned skills in novel ways not encountered during training -- has garnered significant attention. This type of generalization, particularly in scenarios beyond training data, is also of great interest in the study of AI safety and alignment. A recent study introduced the SKILL-MIX evaluation, where models are tasked with composing a short paragraph demonstrating the use of a specified $k$-tuple of language skills. While small models struggled with composing even with $k=3$, larger models like GPT-4 performed reasonably well with $k=5$ and $6$. In this paper, we employ a setup akin to SKILL-MIX to evaluate the capacity of smaller models to learn compositional generalization from examples. Utilizing a diverse set of language skills -- including rhetorical, literary, reasoning, theory of mind, and common sense -- GPT-4 was used to generate text samples that exhibit random subsets of $k$ skills. Subsequent fine-tuning of 7B and 13B parameter models on these combined skill texts, for increasing values of $k$, revealed the following findings: (1) Training on combinations of $k=2$ and $3$ skills results in noticeable improvements in the ability to compose texts with $k=4$ and $5$ skills, despite models never having seen such examples during training. (2) When skill categories are split into training and held-out groups, models significantly improve at composing texts with held-out skills during testing despite having only seen training skills during fine-tuning, illustrating the efficacy of the training approach even with previously unseen skills. This study also suggests that incorporating skill-rich (potentially synthetic) text into training can substantially enhance the compositional capabilities of models.94:T564,Recent research has highlighted the importance of data quality in scaling large language models (LLMs). However, automated data quality control faces unique challenges in collaborative settings where sharing is not allowed directly between data silos. To tackle this issue, this paper proposes a novel data quality control technique based on the notion of data influence on the training dynamics of LLMs, that high quality data are more likely to have similar training dynamics to the anchor dataset. We then leverage the influence of the training dynamics to select high-quality data from different private domains, with centralized model updates on the server side in a collaborative training fashion by either model merging or federated learning. As for the data quality indicator, we compute the per-sample gradients with respect to the private data and the anchor dataset, and use the trace of the accumulated inner products as a measurement of data quality. In addition, we develop a quality control evaluation tailored for collaborative settings with heterogeneous medical domain data. Experiments show that training on the high-quality data selected by our method can often outperform other data selection methods for collaborative fine-tuning of LLMs, across diverse private domain datasets, in medical, multilingual and financial settings. Our code is released at CLUES.95:T59d,In-context learning is a key paradigm in large language models (LLMs) that enables them to generalize to new tasks and domains by simply prompting these models with a few exemplars without explicit parameter updates. Many attempts have been made to understand in-context learning in LLMs as a function of model scale, pretraining data, and other factors. In this work, we propose a new mechanism to probe and understand in-context learning from the lens of decision boundaries for in-context binary classification. Decision boundaries are straightforward to visualize and provide important information about the qualitative behavior of the inductive biases of standard classifiers. To our surprise, we find that the decision boundaries learned by current LLMs in simple binary classification tasks are often irregular and non-smooth, regardless of linear separability in the underlying task. This paper investigates the factors influencing these decision boundaries and explores methods to enhance their generalizability. We assess various approaches, including training-free and fine-tuning methods for LLMs, the impact of model architecture, and the effectiveness of active prompting techniques for smoothing decision boundaries in a data-efficient manner. Our findings provide a deeper understanding of in-context learning dynamics and offer practical improvements for enhancing robustness and generalizability of in-context learning.96:T514,The efficacy of large language models (LLMs) on downstream tasks usually hinges on instruction tuning, which relies critically on the quality of training data. Unfortunately, collecting high-quality and diverse data is both expensive and time-consuming. To mitigate this issue, we propose  a novel Star-Agents framework, which automates the enhancement of data quality across datasets through multi-agent collaboration and assessment. The framework adopts a three-pronged strategy. It  initially generates diverse instruction data with multiple LLM agents through a bespoke sampling method. Subsequently, the generated data undergo a rigorous evaluation using a dual-model method that assesses both difficulty and quality. Finaly, the above process evolves in a dynamic refinement phase, where more effective LLMs are prioritized, enhancing the overall data quality. Our empirical studies, including instruction tuning experiments with models such as Pythia and LLaMA, demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework. Optimized datasets have achieved substantial improvements, with an average increase of 12\% and notable gains in specific metrics, such as a 40\% improvement in Fermi, as evidenced by benchmarks like MT-bench, Vicuna bench, and WizardLM testset. Codes will be released soon.97:T4ba,In today’s era, whatever we can measure at scale, we can optimize. So far, measuring the interpretability of units in deep neural networks (DNNs) for computer vision still requires direct human evaluation and is not scalable. As a result, the inner workings of DNNs remain a mystery despite the remarkable progress we have seen in their applications. In this work, we introduce the first scalable method to measure the per-unit interpretability in vision DNNs. This method does not require any human evaluations, yet its prediction correlates well with existing human interpretability measurements. We validate its predictive power through an interventional human psychophysics study. We demonstrate the usefulness of this measure by performing previously infeasible experiments: (1) A large-scale interpretability analysis across more than 70 million units from 835 computer vision models, and (2) an extensive analysis of how units transform during training. We find an anticorrelation between a model's downstream classification performance and per-unit interpretability, which is also observable during model training. Furthermore, we see that a layer's location and width influence its interpretability.98:T407,Recently, rapid advancements in Multi-Modal In-Context Learning (MM-ICL) have achieved notable success, which is capable of achieving superior performance across various tasks without requiring additional parameter tuning. However, the underlying rules for the effectiveness of MM-ICL remain under-explored. To fill this gap, this work aims to investigate the research question:"What factors affect the performance of MM-ICL?'' To this end, we investigate extensive experiments on the three core steps of MM-ICL including demonstration retrieval, demonstration ordering, and prompt construction using 6 vision large language models and 20 strategies. Our findings highlight (1) the necessity of a multi-modal retriever for demonstration retrieval, (2) the importance of intra-demonstration ordering over inter-demonstration ordering, and (3) the enhancement of task comprehension through introductory instructions in prompts. We hope this study can serve as a foundational guide for optimizing MM-ICL strategies in future research.99:T4f9,In this work, we introduce ChatQA, a suite of models that outperform GPT-4 on retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) and conversational question answering (QA). To enhance generation, we propose a two-stage instruction tuning method that significantly boosts the performance of RAG. For effective retrieval, we introduce a dense retriever optimized for conversational QA, which yields results comparable to the alternative state-of-the-art query rewriting models, while substantially reducing deployment costs. We also present the ChatRAG Bench, which encompasses ten datasets covering comprehensive evaluations on RAG, table-related QA, arithmetic calculations, and scenarios involving unanswerable questions. Our ChatQA-1.0-70B (score: 54.14), built on Llama2, a weaker foundation model than GPT-4, can slightly outperform GPT-4-0613 (score: 53.90) and GPT-4-Turbo-2024-04-09 (score: 54.03) on the ChatRAG Bench, without relying on any synthetic data from OpenAI GPT models. Notably, the Llama3-ChatQA-1.5-70B model surpasses the accuracy of GPT-4-Turbo-2024-04-09, achieving a 4.4% improvement. To advance research in this field, we open-sourced the model weights, instruction tuning data, ChatRAG Bench, and retriever for the community: https://chatqa-project.github.io/.9a:T5fb,Tabular data -- structured, heterogeneous, spreadsheet-style data with rows and columns -- is widely used in practice across many domains. However, while recent foundation models have reduced the need for developing task-specific datasets and predictors in domains such as language modeling and computer vision, this transfer learning paradigm has not had similar impact in the tabular domain. In this work, we seek to narrow this gap and present TabuLa-8B, a language model for tabular prediction. We define a process for extracting a large, high-quality training dataset from the TabLib corpus, proposing methods for tabular data filtering and quality control. Using the resulting dataset, which comprises over 2.1B rows from over 4M unique tables, we fine-tune a Llama 3-8B large language model (LLM) for tabular data prediction (classification and binned regression) using a novel packing and attention scheme for tabular prediction. Through evaluation across a test suite of 329 datasets, we find that TabuLa-8B has zero-shot accuracy on unseen tables that is over 15 percentage points (pp) higher than random guessing, a feat that is not possible with existing state-of-the-art tabular prediction models (e.g. XGBoost, TabPFN). In the few-shot setting (1-32 shots), without any fine-tuning on the target datasets, TabuLa-8B is 5-15 pp more accurate than XGBoost and TabPFN models that are explicitly trained on equal, or even up to 16x more data. We release our model, code, and data along with the publication of this paper.9b:T55e,Instruction data is crucial for improving the capability of Large Language Models (LLMs) to align with human-level performance. Recent research LIMA demonstrates that alignment is essentially a process where the model adapts instructions' interaction style or format to solve various tasks, leveraging pre-trained knowledge and skills. Therefore, for instructional data, the most important aspect is the task it represents, rather than the specific semantics and knowledge information. The latent representations of instructions play roles for some instruction-related tasks like data selection and demonstrations retrieval. However, they are always derived from text embeddings, encompass overall semantic information that influences the representation of task categories. In this work, we introduce a new concept, instruction embedding, and construct Instruction Embedding Benchmark (IEB) for its training and evaluation. Then, we propose a baseline Prompt-based Instruction Embedding (PIE) method to make the representations more attention on tasks. The evaluation of PIE, alongside other embedding methods on IEB with two designed tasks, demonstrates its superior performance in accurately identifying task categories. Moreover, the application of instruction embeddings in four downstream tasks showcases its effectiveness and suitability for instruction-related tasks.9c:T528,Going beyond mimicking limited human experiences, recent studies show initial evidence that, like humans, large language models (LLMs) are capable of improving their abilities purely by self-correction, i.e., correcting previous responses through self-examination, in certain circumstances. Nevertheless, little is known about how such capabilities arise. In this work, based on a simplified setup akin to an alignment task, we theoretically analyze self-correction from an in-context learning perspective, showing that when LLMs give relatively accurate self-examinations as rewards, they are capable of refining responses in an in-context way. Notably, going beyond previous theories on over-simplified linear transformers, our theoretical construction underpins the roles of several key designs of realistic transformers for self-correction: softmax attention, multi-head attention, and the MLP block. We validate these findings extensively on synthetic datasets. Inspired by these findings, we also illustrate novel applications of self-correction, such as defending against LLM jailbreaks, where a simple self-correction step does make a large difference. We believe that these findings will inspire further research on understanding, exploiting, and enhancing self-correction for building better foundation models.9d:T6af,Recent developments of vision large language models (LLMs) have seen remarkable progress, yet still encounter challenges towards multimodal generalists, such as coarse-grained instance-level understanding, lack of unified support for both images and videos, and insufficient coverage across various vision tasks. In this paper, we present VITRON, a universal pixel-level vision LLM designed for comprehensive understanding, generating, segmenting, and editing of both static images and dynamic videos. Building on top of an LLM backbone, VITRON incorporates encoders for images, videos, and pixel-level regional visuals within its frontend modules, while employing state-of-the-art visual specialists as its backend, via which VITRON supports a spectrum of vision end tasks, spanning visual comprehension to visual generation, from low level to high level. To ensure an effective and precise message passing from LLM to backend modules for function invocation, we propose a novel hybrid method by simultaneously integrating discrete textual instructions and continuous signal embeddings. Further, we design various pixel-level spatiotemporal vision-language alignment learning for VITRON to reach the best fine-grained visual capability. Finally, a cross-task synergy module is advised to learn to maximize the task-invariant fine-grained visual features, enhancing the synergy between different visual tasks. Demonstrated over 12 visual tasks and evaluated across 22 datasets, VITRON showcases its extensive capabilities in the four main vision task clusters. Overall, this work illuminates the great potential of developing a more unified multimodal generalist. Project homepage: https://vitron-llm.github.io/9e:T57e,Large language models (LLMs) often hallucinate and lack the ability to provide attribution for their generations. Semi-parametric LMs, such as kNN-LM, approach these limitations by refining the output of an LM for a given prompt using its nearest neighbor matches in a non-parametric data store. However, these models often exhibit slow inference speeds and produce non-fluent texts. In this paper, we introduce Nearest Neighbor Speculative Decoding (NEST), a novel semi-parametric language modeling approach that is capable of incorporating real-world text spans of arbitrary length into the LM generations and providing attribution to their sources. NEST performs token-level retrieval at each inference step to compute a semi-parametric mixture distribution and identify promising span continuations in a corpus. It then uses an approximate speculative decoding procedure that accepts a prefix of the retrieved span or generates a new token. NEST significantly enhances the generation quality and attribution rate of the base LM across a variety of knowledge-intensive tasks, surpassing the conventional kNN-LM method and performing competitively with in-context retrieval augmentation. In addition, NEST substantially improves the generation speed, achieving a 1.8x speedup in inference time when applied to Llama-2-Chat 70B. Code will be released at https://github.com/facebookresearch/NEST/tree/main.9f:T688,Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities in various reasoning tasks, aided by techniques like chain-of-thought prompting that elicits verbalized reasoning. However, LLMs often generate text with obvious mistakes and contradictions, raising doubts about their ability to robustly process and utilize generated rationales. In this work, we investigate reasoning in LLMs through the lens of internal representations, focusing on how these representations are influenced by generated rationales. Our preliminary analysis reveals that while generated rationales improve answer accuracy, inconsistencies emerge between the model's internal representations in middle layers and those in final layers, potentially undermining the reliability of their reasoning processes. To address this, we propose internal consistency as a measure of the model's confidence by examining the agreement of latent predictions decoded from intermediate layers. Extensive empirical studies across different models and datasets demonstrate that internal consistency effectively distinguishes between correct and incorrect reasoning paths. Motivated by this, we propose a new approach to calibrate reasoning by up-weighting reasoning paths with high internal consistency, resulting in a significant boost in reasoning performance. Further analysis uncovers distinct patterns in attention and feed-forward modules across layers, providing insights into the emergence of internal inconsistency. In summary, our results demonstrate the potential of using internal representations for self-evaluation of LLMs. Our code is available at github.com/zhxieml/internal-consistency.a0:T6ba,Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) typically encode an image into a fixed number of visual tokens (e.g., 576) and process these tokens with a language model. Despite their strong performance, LVLMs face challenges in adapting to varying computational constraints. This raises the question: can we achieve flexibility in the number of visual tokens to suit different tasks and computational resources? We answer this with an emphatic yes. Inspired by Matryoshka Representation Learning, we introduce the Matryoshka Query Transformer (MQT), capable of encoding an image into m visual tokens during inference, where m can be any number up to a predefined maximum. This is achieved by employing a query transformer with M latent query tokens to compress the visual embeddings. During each training step, we randomly select m<= M latent query tokens and train the model using only these first m tokens, discarding the rest. Combining MQT with LLaVA, we train a single model once, and flexibly and drastically reduce the number of inference-time visual tokens while maintaining similar or better performance compared to training independent models for each number of tokens. Our model, MQT-LLAVA, matches LLaVA-1.5 performance across 11 benchmarks using a maximum of 256 tokens instead of LLaVA's fixed 576. Reducing to 16 tokens (8x less TFLOPs) only sacrifices the performance by 2.4 points on MMBench. On certain tasks such as ScienceQA and MMMU, we can even go down to only 2 visual tokens with performance drops of just 3% and 6% each. Our exploration of the trade-off between the accuracy and computational cost brought about by the number of visual tokens facilitates future research to achieve the best of both worlds.a1:T58d,Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities across diverse languages. This study explores how LLMs handle multilingualism. Based on observed language ratio shifts among layers and the relationships between network structures and certain capabilities, we hypothesize the LLM's multilingual workflow ($\texttt{MWork}$): LLMs initially understand the query, converting multilingual inputs into English for task-solving. In the intermediate layers, they employ English for thinking and incorporate multilingual knowledge with self-attention and feed-forward structures, respectively. In the final layers, LLMs generate responses aligned with the original language of the query. To verify $\texttt{MWork}$, we introduce Parallel Language-specific Neuron Detection ($\texttt{PLND}$) to identify activated neurons for inputs in different languages without any labeled data. Using $\texttt{PLND}$, we validate $\texttt{MWork}$ through extensive experiments involving the deactivation of language-specific neurons across various layers and structures. Moreover, $\texttt{MWork}$ allows fine-tuning of language-specific neurons with a small dataset, enhancing multilingual abilities in a specific language without compromising others. This approach results in an average improvement of $3.6\%$ for high-resource languages and $2.3\%$ for low-resource languages across all tasks with just $400$ documents.a2:T56e,Despite the effectiveness of data selection for large language models (LLMs) during pretraining and instruction fine-tuning phases, improving data efficiency in supervised fine-tuning (SFT) for specialized domains poses significant challenges due to the complexity of fine-tuning data. To bridge this gap, we introduce an effective and scalable data selection method for SFT, SmallToLarge (S2L), which leverages training trajectories from small models to guide the data selection for larger models. We demonstrate through extensive experiments that S2L significantly improves data efficiency in SFT for mathematical problem-solving, reducing the training data to just 11% of the original MathInstruct dataset (Yue et al., 2023) to match full dataset performance while outperforming state-of-the-art data selection algorithms by an average of 4.7% across 6 in- and out-domain evaluation datasets. Remarkably, selecting only 50K data for SFT, S2L achieves a 32.7% accuracy on the most challenging MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021) benchmark, improving Phi-2 (Li et al., 2023b) by 16.6%. In clinical text summarization on the MIMIC-III dataset (Johnson et al., 2016), S2L again outperforms training on the full dataset using only 50% of the data. Notably, S2L can perform data selection using a reference model 40x smaller than the target model, proportionally reducing the cost of data selection.a3:T448,Efficient deployment of Large Language Models (LLMs) requires batching multiple requests together to improve throughput. As the batch size, context length, or model size increases, the size of the key and value (KV) cache can quickly become the main contributor to GPU memory usage and the bottleneck of inference latency. Quantization has emerged as an effective technique for KV cache compression, but existing methods still fail at very low bit widths. We observe that distinct channels of a key/value activation embedding are highly inter-dependent, and the joint entropy of multiple channels grows at a slower rate than the sum of their marginal entropies. Based on this insight, we propose Coupled Quantization (CQ), which couples multiple key/value channels together to exploit their inter-dependency and encode the activations in a more information-efficient manner. Extensive experiments reveal that CQ outperforms or is competitive with existing baselines in preserving model quality. Furthermore, we demonstrate that CQ can preserve model quality with KV cache quantized down to 1-bit.a4:T47b,Linear attention Transformers and their gated variants, celebrated for enabling parallel training and efficient recurrent inference, still fall short in recall-intensive tasks compared to traditional Transformers and demand significant resources for training from scratch. This paper introduces Gated Slot Attention (GSA), which enhances Attention with Bounded-memory-Control (ABC) by incorporating a gating mechanism inspired by Gated Linear Attention (GLA). Essentially, GSA comprises a two-layer GLA linked via $\operatorname{softmax}$, utilizing context-aware memory reading and adaptive forgetting to improve memory capacity while maintaining compact recurrent state size. This design greatly enhances both training and inference efficiency through GLA's hardware-efficient training algorithm and reduced state size. Additionally, retaining the $\operatorname{softmax}$ operation is particularly beneficial in"finetuning pretrained Transformers to RNNs"(T2R) settings, reducing the need for extensive training from scratch. Extensive experiments confirm GSA's superior performance in scenarios requiring in-context recall and in T2R settings.a5:T5c1,Can Transformers predict new syllogisms by composing established ones? More generally, what type of targets can be learned by such models from scratch? Recent works show that Transformers can be Turing-complete in terms of expressivity, but this does not address the learnability objective. This paper puts forward the notion of 'globality degree' of a target distribution to capture when weak learning is efficiently achievable by regular Transformers. This measure shows a contrast with the expressivity results of Transformers captured by $TC^0/TC^1$ classes (further studied here), since the globality relates to correlations with the more limited $NC^0$ class. We show here experimentally and theoretically under additional assumptions that distributions with high globality cannot be learned efficiently. In particular, syllogisms cannot be composed on long chains. Further, we develop scratchpad techniques and show that: (i) agnostic scratchpads cannot break the globality barrier, (ii) educated scratchpads can break the globality with intermediate steps, although not all such scratchpads can generalize out-of-distribution (OOD), (iii) a notion of 'inductive scratchpad', that composes the prior information more efficiently, can both break the globality barrier and improve the OOD generalization. In particular, some of our inductive scratchpads can achieve length generalizations of up to $6\times$ for some arithmetic tasks depending on the input formatting.a6:T49d,We study how information propagates in decoder-only Transformers, which are the architectural foundation of most existing frontier large language models (LLMs). We rely on a theoretical signal propagation analysis---specifically, we analyse the representations of the last token in the final layer of the Transformer, as this is the representation used for next-token prediction. Our analysis reveals a representational collapse phenomenon: we prove that certain distinct pairs of inputs to the Transformer can yield arbitrarily close representations in the final token. This effect is exacerbated by the low-precision floating-point formats frequently used in modern LLMs. As a result, the model is provably unable to respond to these sequences in different ways---leading to errors in, e.g., tasks involving counting or copying. Further, we show that decoder-only Transformer language models can lose sensitivity to specific tokens in the input, which relates to the well-known phenomenon of over-squashing in graph neural networks. We provide empirical evidence supporting our claims on contemporary LLMs. Our theory points to simple solutions towards ameliorating these issues.a7:T729,Understanding the mechanisms of information storage and transfer in Transformer-based models is important for driving model understanding progress. Recent work has studied these mechanisms for Large Language Models (LLMs), revealing insights on how information is stored in a model's parameters and how information flows to and from these parameters in response to specific prompts. However, these studies have not yet been extended to Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs). Given their expanding capabilities and real-world use, we start by studying one aspect of these models -- how MLLMs process information in a factual visual question answering task. We use a constraint-based formulation which views a visual question as having a set of visual or textual constraints that the model's generated answer must satisfy to be correct (e.g. What movie directed by \emph{the director in this photo} has won a \emph{Golden Globe}?). Under this setting, we contribute i) a method that extends causal information tracing from pure language to the multi-modal setting, and ii) \emph{VQA-Constraints}, a test-bed of 9.7K visual questions annotated with constraints. We use these tools to study two open-source MLLMs, LLaVa and multi-modal Phi-2. Our key findings show that these MLLMs rely on MLP and self-attention blocks in much earlier layers for information storage, compared to LLMs whose mid-layer MLPs are more important. We also show that a consistent small subset of visual tokens output by the vision encoder are responsible for transferring information from the image to these causal blocks. We validate these mechanisms by introducing MultEdit a model-editing algorithm that can correct errors and insert new long-tailed information into MLLMs by targeting these causal blocks. We will publicly release our dataset and code.a8:T680,The path to interpreting a language model often proceeds via analysis of circuits---sparse computational subgraphs of the model that capture specific aspects of its behavior. Recent work has automated the task of discovering circuits. Yet, these methods have practical limitations, as they either rely on inefficient search algorithms or inaccurate approximations. In this paper, we frame circuit discovery as an optimization problem and propose _Edge Pruning_ as an effective and scalable solution. Edge Pruning leverages gradient-based pruning techniques, but instead of removing neurons or components, prunes the _edges_ between components. Our method finds circuits in GPT-2 that use less than half the number of edges than circuits found by previous methods while being equally faithful to the full model predictions on standard circuit-finding tasks. Edge Pruning is efficient on tasks involving up to 100,000 examples, outperforming previous methods in speed and producing substantially better circuits. It also perfectly recovers the ground-truth circuits in two models compiled with Tracr. Thanks to its efficiency, we scale Edge Pruning to CodeLlama-13B, a model over 100x the size of GPT-2.
We use this setting for a case study, where we compare the mechanisms behind instruction prompting and in-context learning.
We find two circuits with more than 99.96% sparsity that match the performance of the full model. Further analysis reveals that the mechanisms in the two settings overlap substantially. This shows that Edge Pruning is a practical and scalable tool for interpretability, 
which can shed light on behaviors that only emerge in large models.a9:T55c,Identifying the features learned by neural networks is a core challenge in mechanistic interpretability. Sparse autoencoders (SAEs), which learn a sparse, overcomplete dictionary that reconstructs a network's internal activations, have been used to identify these features. However, SAEs may learn more about the structure of the datatset than the computational structure of the network. There is therefore only indirect reason to believe that the directions found in these dictionaries are functionally important to the network. We propose end-to-end (e2e) sparse dictionary learning, a method for training SAEs that ensures the features learned are functionally important by minimizing the KL divergence between the output distributions of the original model and the model with SAE activations inserted. Compared to standard SAEs, e2e SAEs offer a Pareto improvement: They explain more network performance, require fewer total features, and require fewer simultaneously active features per datapoint, all with no cost to interpretability. We explore geometric and qualitative differences between e2e SAE features and standard SAE features. E2e dictionary learning brings us closer to methods that can explain network behavior concisely and accurately. We release our library for training e2e SAEs and reproducing our analysis at https://github.com/ApolloResearch/e2e_saeaa:T590,The superior performance of large foundation models relies on the use of massive amounts of high-quality data, which often contain sensitive, private and copyrighted material that requires formal protection. While differential privacy (DP) is a prominent method to gauge the degree of security provided to the models, its application is commonly limited to the model fine-tuning stage, due to the performance degradation when applying DP during the pre-training stage. Consequently, DP is yet not capable of protecting a substantial portion of the data used during the initial pre-training process. In this work, we first provide a theoretical understanding of the efficacy of DP training by analyzing the per-iteration loss improvement. We make a key observation that DP optimizers' performance degradation can be significantly mitigated by the use of limited public data, which leads to a novel DP continual pre-training strategy. Empirically, using only 10\% of public data, our strategy can achieve DP accuracy of 41.5\% on ImageNet-21k (with $\epsilon=8$), as well as non-DP accuracy of 55.7\% and and 60.0\% on downstream tasks Places365 and iNaturalist-2021, respectively, on par with state-of-the-art standard pre-training and substantially outperforming existing DP pre-trained models. Our DP pre-trained models are released in fastDP library (https://github.com/awslabs/fast-differential-privacy/releases/tag/v2.1)ab:T594,Jailbreak attacks cause large language models (LLMs) to generate harmful, unethical, or otherwise objectionable content. Evaluating these attacks presents a number of challenges, which the current collection of benchmarks and evaluation techniques do not adequately address. First, there is no clear standard of practice regarding jailbreaking evaluation. Second, existing works compute costs and success rates in incomparable ways. And third, numerous works are not reproducible, as they withhold adversarial prompts, involve closed-source code, or rely on evolving proprietary APIs. To address these challenges, we introduce JailbreakBench, an open-sourced benchmark with the following components: (1) an evolving repository of state-of-the-art adversarial prompts, which we refer to as *jailbreak artifacts*; (2) a jailbreaking dataset comprising 100 behaviors---both original and sourced from prior work---which align with OpenAI's usage policies; (3) a standardized evaluation framework at https://github.com/JailbreakBench/jailbreakbench that includes a clearly defined threat model, system prompts, chat templates, and scoring functions; and (4) a leaderboard at https://jailbreakbench.github.io/ that tracks the performance of attacks and defenses for various LLMs. We have carefully considered the potential ethical implications of releasing this benchmark, and believe that it will be a net positive for the community.ac:T524,Recent advances in large language models have shown capabilities that are extraordinary and near-superhuman. These models operate with such complexity that reliably evaluating and aligning them proves challenging for humans. This leads to the natural question: can guidance from weak models (like humans) adequately direct the capabilities of strong models? In a recent and somewhat surprising work, Burns et al. (2023) empirically demonstrated that when strong models (like GPT-4) are finetuned using labels generated by weak supervisors (like GPT-2), the strong models outperform their weaker counterparts---a phenomenon they term *weak-to-strong generalization*.

In this work, we present a theoretical framework for understanding weak-to-strong generalization. Specifically, we show that the improvement in performance achieved by strong models over their weaker counterparts is quantified by the *misfit error* incurred by the strong model on labels generated by the weaker model. Our theory reveals several curious algorithmic insights. For instance, we can predict the amount by which the strong model will improve over the weak model, and also choose among different weak models to train the strong model, based on its misfit error. We validate our theoretical findings through various empirical assessments.ad:T5e0,Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning has emerged as a promising approach for enhancing the performance of large language models (LLMs) on complex reasoning tasks. Recently, a series of studies attempt to explain the mechanisms underlying CoT, aiming to deepen the understanding of its efficacy. Nevertheless, the existing research faces two major challenges: (1) a lack of quantitative metrics to assess CoT capabilities and (2) a dearth of guidance on optimizing CoT performance. Motivated by this, in this work, we introduce a novel reasoning boundary framework (RBF) to address these challenges. To solve the lack of quantification, we first define a reasoning boundary (RB) to quantify the upper-bound of CoT and establish a combination law for RB, enabling a practical quantitative approach applicable to various real-world CoT tasks. To address the lack of optimization, we propose three categories of RBs. We further optimize these categories with combination laws focused on RB promotion and reasoning path optimization for CoT improvement. Through extensive experiments on 27 models and 5 tasks, the study validates the existence and rationality of the proposed framework. Furthermore, it explains the effectiveness of 10 CoT strategies and guides optimization from two perspectives. We hope this work can provide a comprehensive understanding of the boundaries and optimization strategies for reasoning in LLMs. Our code and data are available at https://github.com/LightChen233/reasoning-boundary.ae:T613,Many recent state-of-the-art results in language tasks were achieved using compound systems that perform multiple Language Model (LM) calls and aggregate their responses. However, there is little understanding of how the number of LM calls -- e.g., when asking the LM to answer each question multiple times and taking a majority vote -- affects such a compound system's performance. In this paper, we initiate the study of scaling properties of compound inference systems. We analyze, theoretically and empirically, how the number of LM calls affects the performance of Vote and Filter-Vote, two of the simplest compound system designs, which aggregate LM responses via majority voting, optionally applying LM filters. We find, surprisingly, that across multiple language tasks, the performance of both Vote and Filter-Vote can first increase but then decrease as a function of the number of LM calls. Our theoretical results suggest that this non-monotonicity is due to the diversity of query difficulties within a task: more LM calls lead to higher performance on "easy" queries, but lower performance on "hard" queries, and non-monotone behavior can emerge when a task contains both types of queries. This insight then allows us to compute, from a small number of samples, the number of LM calls that maximizes system performance, and define an analytical scaling model for both systems. Experiments show that our scaling model can accurately predict the performance of Vote and Filter-Vote systems and thus find the optimal number of LM calls to make.af:T4ff,Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly essential in processing natural languages, yet their application is frequently compromised by biases and inaccuracies originating in their training data.
In this study, we introduce \textbf{Cross-Care}, the first benchmark framework dedicated to assessing biases and real world knowledge in LLMs, specifically focusing on the representation of disease prevalence across diverse demographic groups.
We systematically evaluate how demographic biases embedded in pre-training corpora like $ThePile$ influence the outputs of LLMs.
We expose and quantify discrepancies by juxtaposing these biases against actual disease prevalences in various U.S. demographic groups.
Our results highlight substantial misalignment between LLM representation of disease prevalence and real disease prevalence rates across demographic subgroups, indicating a pronounced risk of bias propagation and a lack of real-world grounding for medical applications of LLMs.
Furthermore, we observe that various alignment methods minimally resolve inconsistencies in the models' representation of disease prevalence across different languages.
For further exploration and analysis, we make all data and a data visualization tool available at: \url{www.crosscare.net}.b0:T6e9,Causal reasoning capability is critical in advancing large language models (LLMs) towards artificial general intelligence (AGI). While versatile LLMs appear to have demonstrated capabilities in understanding contextual causality and providing responses that obey the laws of causality, it remains unclear whether they perform genuine causal reasoning akin to humans. However, current evidence indicates the contrary. Specifically, LLMs are only capable of performing shallow (level-1) causal reasoning, primarily attributed to the causal knowledge embedded in their parameters, but they lack the capacity for genuine human-like (level-2) causal reasoning. To support this hypothesis, methodologically, we delve into the autoregression mechanism of transformer-based LLMs, revealing that it is not inherently causal. Empirically, we introduce a new causal Q&A benchmark named CausalProbe 2024, whose corpus is fresh and nearly unseen for the studied LLMs. Empirical results show a significant performance drop on CausalProbe 2024 compared to earlier benchmarks, indicating that LLMs primarily engage in level-1 causal reasoning.To bridge the gap towards level-2 causal reasoning, we draw inspiration from the fact that human reasoning is usually facilitated by general knowledge and intended goals. Inspired by this, we propose G$^2$-Reasoner, a LLM causal reasoning method that incorporates general knowledge and goal-oriented prompts into LLMs' causal reasoning processes. Experiments demonstrate that G$^2$-Reasoner significantly enhances LLMs' causal reasoning capability, particularly in fresh and fictitious contexts. This work sheds light on a new path for LLMs to advance towards genuine causal reasoning, going beyond level-1 and making strides towards level-2.b1:T674,Deep learning succeeds by doing hierarchical feature learning, yet tuning hyper-parameters (HP) such as initialization scales, learning rates etc., only give indirect control over this behavior. In this paper, we introduce a key notion to predict and control feature learning: the angle $\theta_\ell$ between the feature updates and the backward pass (at layer index $\ell$). We show that the magnitude of feature updates after one GD step, at any training time, can be expressed via a simple and general *feature speed formula* in terms of this angle $\theta_\ell$, the loss decay, and the magnitude of the backward pass. This angle $\theta_\ell$ is controlled by the conditioning of the layer-to-layer Jacobians and at random initialization, it is determined by the spectrum of a certain kernel, which coincides with the Neural Tangent Kernel when $\ell=\text{depth}$. Given $\theta_\ell$, the feature speed formula provides us with rules to adjust HPs (scales and learning rates) so as to satisfy certain dynamical properties, such as feature learning and loss decay. We investigate the implications of our approach for ReLU MLPs and ResNets in the large width-then-depth limit. Relying on prior work, we show that in ReLU MLPs with iid initialization, the angle degenerates with depth as $\cos(\theta_\ell)=\Theta(1/\sqrt{\ell})$. In contrast, ResNets with branch scale  $O(1/\sqrt{\text{depth}})$ maintain a non-degenerate angle $\cos(\theta_\ell)=\Theta(1)$. We use these insights to recover key properties of known HP scalings (such as $\mu$P), and also introduce a new HP scaling for large depth ReLU MLPs with favorable theoretical properties.b2:T45e,Various linear complexity models, such as Linear Transformer (LinFormer), State Space Model (SSM), and Linear RNN (LinRNN), have been proposed to replace the conventional softmax attention in Transformer structures. However, the optimal design of these linear models is still an open question. In this work, we attempt to answer this question by finding the best linear approximation to softmax attention from a theoretical perspective. We start by unifying existing linear complexity models as the linear attention form and then identify three conditions for the optimal linear attention design: (1) Dynamic memory ability; (2) Static approximation ability; (3) Least parameter approximation. We find that none of the current linear models meet all three conditions, resulting in suboptimal performance. Instead, we propose Meta Linear Attention (MetaLA) as a solution that satisfies these conditions. Our experiments on Multi-Query Associative Recall (MQAR) task, language modeling, image classification, and Long-Range Arena (LRA) benchmark demonstrate that MetaLA is more effective than the existing linear models.b3:T810,We introduce a new linear-algebraic tool based on group representation theory, and use it to address three key problems in machine learning.

1. Past researchers have proposed fast attention algorithms for LLMs by approximating or replace softmax attention with other functions, such as low-degree polynomials. The key property of these functions is that, when applied entry-wise to the matrix $QK^{\top}$, the result is a low rank matrix when $Q$ and $K$ are $n \times d$ matrices and $n \gg d$. This suggests a natural question: what are all functions $f$ with this property? If other $f$ exist and are quickly computable, they can be used in place of softmax for fast subquadratic attention algorithms. It was previously known that low-degree polynomials have this property. We prove that low-degree polynomials are the only piecewise continuous functions with this property. This suggests that the low-rank fast attention only works for functions approximable by polynomials. Our work gives a converse to the polynomial method in algorithm design.

2. We prove the first full classification of all positive definite kernels that are functions of Manhattan or $\ell_1$ distance. Our work generalizes an existing theorem at the heart of all kernel methods in machine learning: the classification of all positive definite kernels that are functions of Euclidean distance. 

3. The key problem in metric transforms, a mathematical theory used in geometry and machine learning, asks what functions transform pairwise distances in semi-metric space $M$ to semi-metric space $N$ for specified $M$ and $N$. We provide the first full classification of functions that transform Manhattan distances to Manhattan distances. Our work generalizes the foundational work of Schoenberg, which fully classifies functions that transform Euclidean to Euclidean distances.
 
We additionally prove results about stable-rank preserving functions that are potentially useful in algorithmic design, and more. Our core new tool is called the representation theory of the hyperrectangle.b4:T513,We develop a framework for analyzing the training and learning rate dynamics on a large class of high-dimensional optimization problems, which we call the high line, trained using one-pass stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with adaptive learning rates. We give exact expressions for the risk and learning rate curves in terms of a deterministic solution to a system of ODEs. We then investigate in detail two adaptive learning rates  -- an idealized exact line search and AdaGrad-Norm -- on the least squares problem. When the data covariance matrix has strictly positive eigenvalues, this idealized exact line search strategy can exhibit arbitrarily slower convergence when compared to the optimal fixed learning rate with SGD. Moreover we exactly characterize the limiting learning rate (as time goes to infinity) for line search in the setting where the data covariance has only two distinct eigenvalues. For noiseless targets, we further demonstrate that the AdaGrad-Norm learning rate converges to a deterministic constant inversely proportional to the average eigenvalue of the data covariance matrix, and identify a phase transition when the covariance density of eigenvalues follows a power law distribution. We provide
our code for evaluation at https://github.com/amackenzie1/highline2024.b5:T43e,Recent work has shown that methods that regularize second order information like SAM can improve generalization in deep learning. Seemingly similar methods like weight noise and gradient penalties often fail to provide such benefits. We investigate this inconsistency and reveal its connection to the the structure of the Hessian of the loss. Specifically, its decomposition into the positive semi-definite Gauss-Newton matrix and an indefinite matrix, which we call the Nonlinear Modeling Error (NME) matrix. Previous studies have largely overlooked the significance of the NME in their analysis for various reasons. However, we provide empirical and theoretical evidence that the NME is important to the performance of gradient penalties and explains their sensitivity to activation functions. We also provide evidence that the difference in regularization performance between gradient penalties and weight noise can be explained by the NME. Our findings emphasize the necessity of considering the NME in both experimental design and theoretical analysis for sharpness regularization.b6:T558,In-context learning (ICL) and supervised fine-tuning (SFT) are two common strategies for improving the performance of modern large language models (LLMs) on specific tasks. Despite their different natures, these strategies often lead to comparable performance gains. 
However, little is known about whether they induce similar representations inside LLMs.  We approach this problem by analyzing the probability landscape of their hidden representations in the two cases. More specifically, we compare how LLMs solve the same question-answering task, finding that ICL and SFT create very different internal structures, in both cases undergoing a sharp transition in the middle of the network. In the first half of the network, ICL shapes interpretable representations hierarchically organized according to their semantic content. In contrast, the probability landscape obtained with SFT is fuzzier and semantically mixed. In the second half of the model, the fine-tuned representations develop probability modes that better encode the identity of answers, while less-defined peaks characterize the landscape of ICL representations. Our approach reveals the diverse computational strategies developed inside LLMs to solve the same task across different conditions, allowing us to make a step towards designing optimal methods to extract information from language models.b7:T6f1,Language models (LMs) only pretrained on a general and massive corpus usually cannot attain satisfying performance on domain-specific downstream tasks, and hence, applying domain-specific pretraining to LMs is a common and indispensable practice.
However, domain-specific pretraining can be costly and time-consuming, hindering LMs' deployment in real-world applications.
In this work, we consider the incapability to memorize domain-specific knowledge embedded in the general corpus with rare occurrences and long-tail distributions as the leading cause for pretrained LMs' inferior downstream performance. 
Analysis of Neural Tangent Kernels (NTKs) reveals that those long-tail data are commonly overlooked in the model's gradient updates and, consequently, are not effectively memorized, leading to poor domain-specific downstream performance.
Based on the intuition that data with similar semantic meaning are closer in the embedding space, we devise a Cluster-guided Sparse Expert (CSE) layer to actively learn long-tail domain knowledge typically neglected in previous pretrained LMs.
During pretraining, a CSE layer efficiently clusters domain knowledge together and assigns long-tail knowledge to designate extra experts. CSE is also a lightweight structure that only needs to be incorporated in several deep layers.
With our training strategy, we found that during pretraining, data of long-tail knowledge gradually formulate isolated, outlier clusters in an LM's representation spaces, especially in deeper layers. Our experimental results show that only pretraining CSE-based LMs is enough to achieve superior performance than regularly pretrained-finetuned LMs on various downstream tasks, implying the prospects of domain-specific-pretraining-free language models.b8:T65d,The Large Vision-Language Model (LVLM) field has seen significant advancements, yet its progression has been hindered by challenges in comprehending fine-grained visual content due to limited resolution. Recent efforts have aimed to enhance the high-resolution understanding capabilities of LVLMs, yet they remain capped at approximately 1500 x 1500 pixels and constrained to a relatively narrow resolution range. This paper represents InternLM-XComposer2-4KHD, a groundbreaking exploration into elevating LVLM resolution capabilities up to 4K HD (3840 x 1600) and beyond. Concurrently, considering the ultra-high resolution may not be necessary in all scenarios, it supports a wide range of diverse resolutions from 336 pixels to 4K standard, significantly broadening its scope of applicability. Specifically, this research advances the patch division paradigm by introducing a novel extension: dynamic resolution with automatic patch configuration. It maintains the training image aspect ratios while automatically varying patch counts and configuring layouts based on a pre-trained Vision Transformer (ViT) (336 x 336), leading to dynamic training resolution from 336 pixels to 4K standard. Our research demonstrates that scaling training resolution up to 4K HD leads to consistent performance enhancements without hitting the ceiling of potential improvements. InternLM-XComposer2-4KHD shows superb capability that matches or even surpasses GPT-4V and Gemini Pro in 10 of the 16 benchmarks. The InternLM-XComposer2-4KHD model series with 7B parameters are publicly available at https://github.com/InternLM/InternLM-XComposer.b9:T590,The rapid proliferation of open-source language models significantly increases the risks of downstream backdoor attacks. These backdoors can introduce dangerous behaviours during model deployment and can evade detection by conventional cybersecurity monitoring systems. In this paper, we introduce a novel class of backdoors in transformer models, that, in contrast to prior art, are unelicitable in nature. Unelicitability prevents the defender from triggering the backdoor, making it impossible to properly evaluate ahead of deployment even if given full white-box access and using automated techniques, such as red-teaming or certain formal verification methods. We show that our novel construction is not only unelicitable thanks to using cryptographic techniques, but also has favourable robustness properties.
We confirm these properties in empirical investigations, and provide evidence that our backdoors can withstand state-of-the-art mitigation strategies. Additionally, we expand on previous work by showing that our universal backdoors, while not completely undetectable in white-box settings, can be harder to detect than some existing designs. By demonstrating the feasibility of seamlessly integrating backdoors into transformer models, this paper fundamentally questions the efficacy of pre-deployment detection strategies. This offers new insights into the offence-defence balance in AI safety and security.ba:T53c,The surge in applications of large language models (LLMs) has prompted concerns about the generation of misleading or fabricated information, known as hallucinations. Therefore, detecting hallucinations has become critical to maintaining trust in LLM-generated content. A primary challenge in learning a truthfulness classifier is the lack of a large amount of labeled truthful and hallucinated data. To address the challenge, we introduce HaloScope, a novel learning framework that leverages the unlabeled LLM generations in the wild for hallucination detection. Such unlabeled data arises freely upon deploying LLMs in the open world, and consists of both truthful and hallucinated information. To harness the unlabeled data, we present an automated membership estimation score for distinguishing between truthful and untruthful generations within unlabeled mixture data, thereby enabling the training of a binary truthfulness classifier on top. Importantly, our framework does not require extra data collection and human annotations, offering strong flexibility and practicality for real-world applications. Extensive experiments show that HaloScope can achieve superior hallucination detection performance, outperforming the competitive rivals by a significant margin. Code is available at https://github.com/deeplearningwisc/haloscope.bb:T4a7,When Large Language Models (LLMs) are compressed using techniques such as quantization, the predominant way to demonstrate the validity of such techniques is by measuring the model's accuracy on various benchmarks.If the accuracies of the baseline model and the compressed model are close, it is assumed that there was negligible degradation in quality.However, even when the accuracy of baseline and compressed model are similar, we observe the phenomenon of flips, wherein answers change from correct to incorrect and vice versa in proportion.We conduct a detailed study of metrics across multiple compression techniques, models and datasets, demonstrating that the behavior of compressed models as visible to end-users is often significantly different from the baseline model, even when accuracy is similar.We further evaluate compressed models qualitatively and quantitatively using MT-Bench and show that compressed models are significantly worse than baseline models in this free-form generative task.Thus, we argue that compression techniques should also be evaluated using distance metrics.We propose two such metrics, KL-Divergence and flips, and show that they are well correlated.bc:T4ed,Large language models (LLMs) have shown impressive performance on downstream tasks by in-context learning (ICL), which heavily relies on the quality of demonstrations selected from a large set of annotated examples. Recent works claim that in-context learning is robust to noisy demonstrations in text classification. In this work, we show that, on text generation tasks, noisy annotations significantly hurt the performance of in-context learning. To circumvent the issue, we propose a simple and effective approach called Local Perplexity Ranking (LPR), which replaces the "noisy" candidates with their nearest neighbors that are more likely to be clean. Our method is motivated by analyzing the perplexity deviation caused by noisy labels and decomposing perplexity into inherent perplexity and matching perplexity. Our key idea behind LPR is thus to decouple the matching perplexity by performing the ranking among the neighbors in semantic space. Our approach can prevent the selected demonstrations from including mismatched input-label pairs while preserving the effectiveness of the original selection methods. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of LPR, improving the EM score by up to 18.75 on common benchmarks with noisy annotations.bd:T4ed,This work presents a unified knowledge protocol, called UKnow, which facilitates knowledge-based studies from the perspective of data. Particularly focusing on visual and linguistic modalities, we categorize data knowledge into five unit types, namely, in-image, in-text, cross-image, cross-text, and image-text, and set up an efficient pipeline to help construct the multimodal knowledge graph from any data collection. Thanks to the logical information naturally contained in knowledge graph, organizing datasets under UKnow format opens up more possibilities of data usage compared to the commonly used image-text pairs. Following UKnow protocol, we collect, from public international news, a large-scale multimodal knowledge graph dataset that consists of 1,388,568 nodes (with 571,791 vision-related ones) and 3,673,817 triplets. The dataset is also annotated with rich event tags, including 11 coarse labels and 9,185 fine labels. Experiments on four benchmarks demonstrate the potential of UKnow in supporting common-sense reasoning and boosting vision-language pre-training with a single dataset, benefiting from its unified form of knowledge organization. Code, dataset, and models will be made publicly available. See Appendix to download the dataset.be:T402,Recent advances in AI have been significantly driven by the capabilities of large language models (LLMs) to solve complex problems in ways that resemble human thinking. However, there is an ongoing debate about the extent to which LLMs are capable of
actual reasoning. Central to this debate are two key probabilistic concepts that are essential for connecting causes
to their effects: the probability of necessity (PN) and the probability of sufficiency (PS). This paper introduces a framework that is both theoretical and practical, aimed at assessing how effectively LLMs are able to replicate real-world reasoning mechanisms using these probabilistic measures. By viewing LLMs as abstract machines that process information through a natural language interface, we examine the conditions under which it is possible to compute suitable approximations of PN and PS. Our research marks an important step towards gaining a deeper understanding of when LLMs are capable of reasoning, as illustrated by a series of math examples.bf:T4b4,Recent analysis on the training dynamics of Transformers has unveiled an interesting characteristic: the training loss plateaus for a significant number of training steps, and then suddenly (and sharply) drops to near--optimal values. To understand this phenomenon in depth, we formulate the low-rank matrix completion problem as a masked language modeling (MLM) task, and show that it is possible to train a BERT model to solve this task to low error. Furthermore, the loss curve shows a plateau early in training followed by a sudden drop to near-optimal values, despite no changes in the training procedure or hyper-parameters. To gain interpretability insights into this sudden drop, we examine the model's predictions, attention heads, and hidden states before and after this transition. Concretely, we observe that (a) the model transitions from simply copying the masked input to accurately predicting the masked entries; (b) the attention heads transition to interpretable patterns relevant to the task; and (c) the embeddings and hidden states encode information relevant to the problem. We also analyze the training dynamics of individual model components to understand the sudden drop in loss.c0:T639,To determine the safety of large language models (LLMs), AI developers must be able to assess their dangerous capabilities. But simple prompting strategies often fail to elicit an LLM's full capabilities. One way to elicit capabilities more robustly is to fine-tune the LLM to complete the task. In this paper, we investigate the conditions under which fine-tuning-based elicitation suffices to elicit capabilities. To do this, we introduce password-locked models, LLMs fine-tuned such that some of their capabilities are deliberately hidden. Specifically, these LLMs are trained to exhibit these capabilities only when a password is present in the prompt, and to imitate a much weaker LLM otherwise. Password-locked models enable a novel method of evaluating capabilities elicitation methods, by testing whether these password-locked capabilities can be elicited without using the password. We find that a few high-quality demonstrations are often sufficient to fully elicit password-locked capabilities. More surprisingly, fine-tuning can elicit other capabilities that have been locked using the same password, or even different passwords. Furthermore, when only evaluations, and not demonstrations, are available, approaches like reinforcement learning are still often able to elicit capabilities. Overall, our findings suggest that fine-tuning is an effective method of eliciting hidden capabilities of current models, but may be unreliable when high-quality demonstrations are not available, e.g. as may be the case when models' (hidden) capabilities exceed those of human demonstrators.c1:T544,This paper concerns the problem of aligning samples from large language models to human preferences using best-of-$n$ sampling, where we draw $n$ samples, rank them, and return the best one. We consider two fundamental problems. First: what is the relationship between best-of-$n$ and approaches to alignment that train LLMs to output samples with a high expected reward (e.g., RLHF or DPO)? To answer this, we embed both the best-of-$n$ distribution and the sampling distributions learned by alignment procedures in a common class of tiltings of the base LLM distribution. We then show that, within this class, best-of-$n$ is essentially optimal in terms of the trade-off between win-rate against the base model vs KL distance from the base model. That is, best-of-$n$ is the best choice of alignment distribution if the goal is to maximize win rate. However, best-of-$n$ requires drawing $n$ samples for each inference, a substantial cost. To avoid this, the second problem we consider is how to fine-tune a LLM to mimic the best-of-$n$ sampling distribution. We derive BoNBoN Alignment to achieve this by exploiting the special structure of the best-of-$n$ distribution. Experiments show that BoNBoN alignment yields substantial improvements in producing a model that is preferred to the base policy while minimally affecting off-target aspects.c2:T41d,Due to the lack of state dimension optimization methods, deep state space models (SSMs) have sacrificed model capacity, training search space, or stability to alleviate computational costs caused by high state dimensions. In this work, we provide a structured pruning method for SSMs, Layer-Adaptive STate pruning (LAST), which reduces the state dimension of each layer in minimizing model-level output energy loss by extending modal truncation for a single system. LAST scores are evaluated using the $\mathcal{H}_{\infty}$ norms of subsystems and layer-wise energy normalization. The scores serve as global pruning criteria, enabling cross-layer comparison of states and layer-adaptive pruning. Across various sequence benchmarks, LAST optimizes previous SSMs, revealing the redundancy and compressibility of their state spaces. Notably, we demonstrate that, on average, pruning 33% of states still maintains performance with 0.52% accuracy loss in multi-input multi-output SSMs without retraining. Code is available at https://github.com/msgwak/LAST.c3:T65a,We present a novel bi-directional Transformer architecture (BiXT) which scales linearly with input size in terms of computational cost and memory consumption, but does not suffer the drop in performance or limitation to only one input modality seen with other efficient Transformer-based approaches. BiXT is inspired by the Perceiver architectures but replaces iterative attention with an efficient bi-directional cross-attention module in which input tokens and latent variables attend to each other simultaneously, leveraging a naturally emerging attention-symmetry between the two. This approach unlocks a key bottleneck experienced by Perceiver-like architectures and enables the processing and interpretation of both semantics ('what') and location ('where') to develop alongside each other over multiple layers -- allowing its direct application to dense and instance-based tasks alike. By combining efficiency with the generality and performance of a full Transformer architecture, BiXT can process longer sequences like point clouds, text or images at higher feature resolutions and achieves competitive performance across a range of tasks like point cloud part segmentation, semantic image segmentation, image classification, hierarchical sequence modeling and document retrieval. Our experiments demonstrate that BiXT models outperform larger competitors by leveraging longer sequences more efficiently on vision tasks like classification and segmentation, and perform on par with full Transformer variants on sequence modeling and document retrieval -- but require 28\% fewer FLOPs and are up to $8.4\times$ faster.c4:T68c,While large language models (LLMs) such as Llama-2 or GPT-4 have shown impressive zero-shot performance, fine-tuning is still necessary to enhance their performance for customized datasets, domain-specific tasks, or other private needs. However, fine-tuning all parameters of LLMs requires significant hardware resources, which can be impractical for typical users. Therefore, parameter-efficient fine-tuning such as LoRA have emerged, allowing users to fine-tune LLMs without the need for considerable computing resources, with little performance degradation compared to fine-tuning all parameters. Unfortunately, recent studies indicate that fine-tuning can increase the risk to the safety of LLMs, even when data does not contain malicious content. To address this challenge, we propose $\textsf{Safe LoRA}$, a simple one-liner patch to the original LoRA implementation by introducing the projection of LoRA weights from selected layers to the safety-aligned subspace, effectively reducing the safety risks in LLM fine-tuning while maintaining utility. It is worth noting that $\textsf{Safe LoRA}$ is a training-free and data-free approach, as it only requires the knowledge of the weights from the base and aligned LLMs. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that when fine-tuning on purely malicious data, $\textsf{Safe LoRA}$ retains similar safety performance as the original aligned model. Moreover, when the fine-tuning dataset contains a mixture of both benign and malicious data,  $\textsf{Safe LoRA}$ mitigates the negative effect made by malicious data while preserving performance on downstream tasks.  Our codes are available at https://github.com/IBM/SafeLoRA.c5:T585,We study the optimal memorization capacity of modern Hopfield models and Kernelized Hopfield Models (KHMs), a transformer-compatible class of Dense Associative Memories.
We present a tight analysis by establishing a connection between the memory configuration of KHMs and spherical codes from information theory. 
Specifically, we treat the stored memory set as a specialized spherical code.
This enables us to cast the memorization problem in KHMs into a point arrangement problem on a hypersphere.
We show that the optimal capacity of KHMs occurs when the feature space allows memories to form an optimal spherical code.
This unique perspective leads to: 
1. An analysis of how KHMs achieve optimal memory capacity, and identify corresponding necessary conditions. 
Importantly, we establish an upper capacity bound that matches the well-known exponential lower bound in the literature. 
This provides the first tight and optimal asymptotic memory capacity  for modern Hopfield models.
2. A sub-linear time algorithm $\mathtt{U}\text{-}\mathtt{Hop}$+ to reach KHMs' optimal capacity. 
3. An analysis of the scaling behavior of the required feature dimension relative to the number of stored memories.

These efforts improve both the retrieval capability of KHMs and the representation learning of corresponding transformers.
Experimentally, we provide thorough numerical results to back up theoretical findings.c6:T514,Recent sequence modeling approaches using selective state space sequence models, referred to as Mamba models, have seen a surge of interest. These models allow efficient processing of long sequences in linear time and are rapidly being adopted in a wide range of applications such as language modeling, demonstrating promising performance. To foster their reliable use in real-world scenarios, it is crucial to augment their transparency. Our work bridges this critical gap by bringing explainability, particularly Layer-wise Relevance Propagation (LRP), to the Mamba architecture. Guided by the axiom of relevance conservation, we identify specific components in the Mamba architecture, which cause unfaithful explanations. To remedy this issue, we propose MambaLRP, a novel algorithm within the LRP framework, which ensures a more stable and reliable relevance propagation through these components. Our proposed method is theoretically sound and excels in achieving state-of-the-art explanation performance across a diverse range of models and datasets. Moreover, MambaLRP facilitates a deeper inspection of Mamba architectures, uncovering various biases and evaluating their significance. It also enables the analysis of previous speculations regarding the long-range capabilities of Mamba models.c7:T430,Fine-tuning pre-trained models for downstream tasks is a widely adopted technique known for its adaptability and reliability across various domains. Despite its conceptual simplicity, fine-tuning entails several troublesome engineering choices, such as selecting hyperparameters and determining checkpoints from an optimization trajectory. To tackle the difficulty of choosing the best model, one effective solution is model fusion, which combines multiple models in a parameter space. However, we observe a large discrepancy between loss and metric landscapes during the fine-tuning of pre-trained language models. Building on this observation, we introduce a novel model fusion technique that optimizes both the desired metric and loss through multi-objective Bayesian optimization. In addition, to effectively select hyperparameters, we establish a two-stage procedure by integrating Bayesian optimization processes into our framework. Experiments across various downstream tasks show considerable performance improvements using our Bayesian optimization-guided method.c8:T484,Do neural networks learn to implement algorithms such as look-ahead or search "in the wild"? Or do they rely purely on collections of simple heuristics? We present evidence of *learned look-ahead* in the policy and value network of Leela Chess Zero, the currently strongest deep neural chess engine. We find that Leela internally represents future optimal moves and that these representations are crucial for its final output in certain board states. Concretely, we exploit the fact that Leela is a transformer that treats every chessboard square like a token in language models, and give three lines of evidence: (1) activations on certain squares of future moves are unusually important causally; (2) we find attention heads that move important information "forward and backward in time," e.g., from squares of future moves to squares of earlier ones; and (3) we train a simple probe that can predict the optimal move 2 turns ahead with 92% accuracy (in board states where Leela finds a single best line). These findings are clear evidence of learned look-ahead in neural networks and might be a step towards a better understanding of their capabilities.c9:T464,This paper presents a method for estimating the hallucination rate for in-context learning (ICL) with generative AI. In ICL, a conditional generative model (CGM) is prompted with a dataset and a prediction question and asked to generate a response. One interpretation of ICL assumes that the CGM computes the posterior predictive of an unknown Bayesian model, which implicitly defines a joint distribution over observable datasets and latent mechanisms. This joint distribution factorizes into two components: the model prior over mechanisms and the model likelihood of datasets given a mechanism. With this perspective, we define a \textit{hallucination} as a generated response to the prediction question with low model likelihood given the mechanism. We develop a new method that takes an ICL problem and estimates the probability that a CGM will generate a hallucination. Our method only requires generating prediction questions and responses from the CGM and evaluating its response log probability. We empirically evaluate our method using large language models for synthetic regression and natural language ICL tasks.ca:T543,Transformers have demonstrated great power in the recent development of large foundational models. In particular, the Vision Transformer (ViT) has brought revolutionary changes to the field of vision, achieving significant accomplishments on the experimental side. However, their theoretical capabilities, particularly in terms of generalization when trained to overfit training data, are still not fully understood. To address this gap, this work delves deeply into the \textit{benign overfitting} perspective of transformers in vision. To this end, we study the optimization of a Transformer composed of a self-attention layer with softmax followed by a fully connected layer under gradient descent on a certain data distribution model. By developing techniques that address the challenges posed by softmax and the interdependent nature of multiple weights in transformer optimization, we successfully characterized the training dynamics and achieved generalization in post-training. Our results establish a sharp condition that can distinguish between the small test error phase and the large test error regime, based on the signal-to-noise ratio in the data model. The theoretical results are further verified by experimental simulation. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to characterize benign overfitting for Transformers.cb:T42c,This paper presents MaVEn, an innovative Multi-granularity Visual Encoding framework designed to enhance the capabilities of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) in multi-image reasoning. Current MLLMs primarily focus on single-image visual understanding, limiting their ability to interpret and integrate information across multiple images. MaVEn addresses this limitation by combining discrete visual symbol sequences, which abstract coarse-grained semantic concepts, with traditional continuous representation sequences that model fine-grained features. This dual approach bridges the semantic gap between visual and textual data, thereby improving the model's ability to process and interpret information from multiple images effectively. Additionally, we design a dynamic reduction mechanism by for long-sequence continuous features to enhance multi-image processing efficiency. Experimental results demonstrate that MaVEn significantly enhances MLLMs' understanding in complex multi-image scenarios, while also improving performance in single-image contexts.cc:T81b,We introduce WildTeaming, an automatic red-teaming framework that mines in-the-wild user-chatbot interactions to discover 5.7K unique clusters of novel jailbreak tactics, and then composes selections of multiple mined tactics for systematic exploration of novel and even more challenging jailbreaks.
Compared to prior work that performed red-teaming via recruited human workers, gradient-based optimization, or iterative revision with large language models (LLMs), our work investigates jailbreaks from chatbot users in-the-wild who were not specifically instructed to break the system.  WildTeaming reveals previously unidentified vulnerabilities of frontier LLMs, resulting in more diverse and successful adversarial attacks compared to state-of-the-art jailbreaking methods. 

While there exist many datasets for jailbreak evaluation, very few open-source datasets exist for jailbreak training, as safety training data has been closed among all frontier models even when their weights are open. Therefore, with WildTeaming we create WildJailbreak, a large-scale open-source synthetic safety dataset with 262K vanilla (direct request) and adversarial (complex jailbreak) prompt-response pairs. In order to mitigate exaggerated safety behaviors, WildJailbreak provides two contrastive types of queries: 1) harmful queries (both vanilla and adversarial) and 2) benign queries that resemble harmful queries in form but contain no harmful intent. As WildJailbreak considerably upgrades the quality and scale of existing safety resources, it uniquely enables us to examine the scaling effects of data and the interplay of data properties and model capabilities during safety training. Through extensive model training and evaluations, we identify the training properties that enable an ideal balance of safety behaviors: appropriate safeguarding without over-refusal, effective handling of both vanilla and adversarial queries, and minimal, if any, decrease in general capabilities. All the components of WildJailbreak contribute to achieving balanced safety behaviors of modelscd:T4d7,Large Multi-modal Models (LMMs) have recently demonstrated remarkable abilities in visual context understanding and coherent response generation. However, alongside these advancements, the issue of hallucinations has emerged as a significant challenge, producing erroneous responses that are unrelated to the visual contents. In this paper, we introduce a novel contrastive-based decoding method, COuntering DEscription Contrastive Decoding (CODE), which leverages self-generated descriptions as contrasting references during the decoding phase of LMMs to address hallucination issues. CODE utilizes the comprehensive descriptions from model itself as visual counterpart to correct and improve response alignment with actual visual content. By dynamically adjusting the information flow and distribution of next-token predictions in the LMM's vocabulary, CODE enhances the coherence and informativeness of generated responses. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method significantly reduces hallucinations and improves cross-modal consistency across various benchmarks and cutting-edge LMMs. Our method provides a simple yet effective decoding strategy that can be integrated to existing LMM frameworks without additional training.ce:T483,In-context learning (ICL) of large language models has proven to be a surprisingly effective method of learning a new task from only a few demonstrative examples. In this paper, we shed light on the efficacy of ICL from the viewpoint of statistical learning theory. We develop approximation and generalization error analyses for a transformer model composed of a deep neural network and one linear attention layer, pretrained on nonparametric regression tasks sampled from general function spaces including the Besov space and piecewise $\gamma$-smooth class. In particular, we show that sufficiently trained transformers can achieve -- and even improve upon -- the minimax optimal estimation risk in context by encoding the most relevant basis representations during pretraining. Our analysis extends to high-dimensional or sequential data and distinguishes the \emph{pretraining} and \emph{in-context} generalization gaps, establishing upper and lower bounds w.r.t. both the number of tasks and in-context examples. These findings shed light on the effectiveness of few-shot prompting and the roles of task diversity and representation learning for ICL.cf:T4c2,Aligning large language models (LLMs) with human objectives is crucial for real-world applications. However, fine-tuning LLMs for alignment often suffers from unstable training and requires substantial computing resources. Test-time alignment techniques, such as prompting and guided decoding, do not modify the underlying model, and their performance remains dependent on the original model's capabilities. To address these challenges, we propose aligning LLMs through representation editing. The core of our method is to view a pre-trained autoregressive LLM as a discrete-time stochastic dynamical system. To achieve alignment for specific objectives, we introduce external control signals into the state space of this language dynamical system. We train a value function directly on the hidden states according to the Bellman equation, enabling gradient-based optimization to obtain the optimal control signals at test time. Our experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms existing test-time alignment techniques while requiring significantly fewer resources compared to fine-tuning methods. Our code is available at [https://github.com/Lingkai-Kong/RE-Control](https://github.com/Lingkai-Kong/RE-Control).d0:T7e9,Alignment techniques are critical in ensuring that large language models (LLMs) output helpful and harmless content by enforcing the LLM-generated content to align with human preferences. 
However, the existence of noisy preferences (NPs), where the responses are mistakenly labelled as chosen or rejected, could spoil the alignment, thus making the LLMs generate useless and even malicious content. 
Existing methods mitigate the issue of NPs from the loss perspective by adjusting the alignment loss based on a clean validation dataset.
Orthogonal to these loss-oriented methods, we propose perplexity-aware correction (PerpCorrect) from the data perspective for robust alignment which detects and corrects NPs based on the differences between the perplexity of the chosen and rejected responses (dubbed as PPLDiff). 
Intuitively, a higher PPLDiff indicates a higher probability of the NP because a rejected/chosen response which is mistakenly labelled as chosen/rejected is less preferable to be generated by an aligned LLM, thus having a higher/lower perplexity.
PerpCorrect works in three steps: 
(1) PerpCorrect aligns a surrogate LLM using the clean validation data to make the PPLDiff able to distinguish clean preferences (CPs) and NPs. 
(2) PerpCorrect further aligns the surrogate LLM by incorporating the reliable clean training data whose PPLDiff is extremely small and reliable noisy training data whose PPLDiff is extremely large after correction to boost the discriminatory power.
(3) Detecting and correcting NPs according to the PPLDiff obtained by the aligned surrogate LLM to obtain a denoised training dataset for robust alignment.
Comprehensive experiments validate that our proposed PerpCorrect can achieve state-of-the-art alignment performance under NPs.
Notably, PerpCorrect demonstrates practical utility by requiring only a modest amount of validation data and being compatible with various alignment techniques. 
Our code is available at [PerpCorrect](https://github.com/luxinyayaya/PerpCorrect).d1:T67c,Current benchmarks for assessing vision-language models (VLMs) often focus on their perception or problem-solving capabilities and neglect other critical aspects such as fairness, multilinguality, or toxicity. Furthermore, they differ in their evaluation procedures and the scope of the evaluation, making it difficult to compare models. To address these issues, we extend the HELM framework to VLMs to present the Holistic Evaluation of Vision Language Models (VHELM). VHELM aggregates various datasets to cover one or more of the 9 aspects: visual perception, knowledge, reasoning, bias, fairness, multilinguality, robustness, toxicity, and safety. In doing so, we produce a comprehensive, multi-dimensional view of the capabilities of the VLMs across these important factors. In addition, we standardize the standard inference parameters, methods of prompting, and evaluation metrics to enable fair comparisons across models. Our framework is designed to be lightweight and automatic so that evaluation runs are cheap and fast. Our initial run evaluates 22 VLMs on 21 existing datasets to provide a holistic snapshot of the models. We uncover new key findings, such as the fact that efficiency-focused models (e.g., Claude 3 Haiku or Gemini 1.5 Flash) perform significantly worse than their full models (e.g., Claude 3 Opus or Gemini 1.5 Pro) on the bias benchmark but not when evaluated on the other aspects. For transparency, we release the raw model generations and complete results on our website (https://crfm.stanford.edu/helm/vhelm/v2.0.1). VHELM is intended to be a living benchmark, and we hope to continue adding new datasets and models over time.d2:T6c5,Large language models (LLMs) are known for their exceptional performance in natural language processing, making them highly effective in many human life-related or even job-related tasks. The attention mechanism in the Transformer architecture is a critical component of LLMs, as it allows the model to selectively focus on specific input parts. The softmax unit, which is a key part of the attention mechanism, normalizes the attention scores. Hence, the performance of LLMs in various NLP tasks depends significantly on the crucial role played by the attention mechanism with the softmax unit. In-context learning, as one of the celebrated abilities of recent LLMs, is an important concept in querying LLMs such as ChatGPT. Without further parameter updates, Transformers can learn to predict based on few in-context examples. However, the reason why Transformers becomes in-context learners is not well understood. Recently, several works [ASA+22,GTLV22,ONR+22] have studied the in-context learning from a mathematical perspective based on a linear regression formulation $\min_x\| Ax - b \|_2$, which show Transformers' capability of learning linear functions in context. In this work, we study the in-context learning based on a softmax regression formulation $\min_{x} \| \langle \exp(Ax), {\bf 1}_n \rangle^{-1} \exp(Ax) - b \|_2$ of Transformer's attention mechanism. We show the upper bounds of the data transformations induced by a single self-attention layer and by gradient-descent on a $\ell_2$ regression loss for softmax prediction function, which imply that when training self-attention-only Transformers for fundamental regression tasks, the models learned by gradient-descent and Transformers show great similarity.d3:T520,Large language models (LLMs) are reported to be partial to certain cultures owing to the training data dominance from the English corpora. Since multilingual cultural data are often expensive to collect, existing efforts handle this by prompt engineering or culture-specific pre-training. However, they might overlook the knowledge deficiency of low-resource culture and require extensive computing resources. In this paper, we propose CultureLLM, a cost-effective solution to incorporate cultural differences into LLMs. CultureLLM adopts World Value Survey (WVS) as seed data and generates semantically equivalent training data via the proposed semantic data augmentation. Using only 50 seed samples from WVS with augmented data, we fine-tune culture-specific LLMs and one unified model (CultureLLM-One) for 9 cultures covering rich and low-resource languages. Extensive experiments on 60 culture-related datasets demonstrate that CultureLLM significantly outperforms various counterparts such as GPT-3.5 (by 8.1%) and Gemini Pro (by 9.5%) with comparable performance to GPT-4 or even better. Our human study shows that the generated samples are semantically equivalent to the original samples, providing an effective solution for LLMs augmentation. Code is released at https://github.com/Scarelette/CultureLLM.d4:T470,How do large language models (LLMs) encode the state of the world, including the status of entities and their relations, as described by a text? While existing work directly probes for a complete state of the world, our research explores whether and how LLMs abstract this world state in their internal representations. We propose a new framework for probing for world representations through the lens of state abstraction theory from reinforcement learning, which emphasizes different levels of abstraction, distinguishing between general abstractions that facilitate predicting future states and goal-oriented abstractions that guide the subsequent actions to accomplish tasks. To instantiate this framework, we design a text-based planning task, where an LLM acts as an agent in an environment and interacts with objects in containers to achieve a specified goal state. Our experiments reveal that fine-tuning as well as advanced pre-training strengthens LLM-built representations’ tendency of maintaining goal-oriented abstractions during decoding, prioritizing task completion over recovery of the world’s state and dynamics. 1d5:T604,In this work, we study the generalizability of diffusion models by looking into the hidden properties of the learned score functions, which are essentially a series of deep denoisers trained on various noise levels. We observe that as diffusion models transition from memorization to generalization, their corresponding nonlinear diffusion denoisers exhibit increasing linearity. This discovery leads us to investigate the linear counterparts of the nonlinear diffusion models, which are a series of linear models trained to match the function mappings of the nonlinear diffusion denoisers. Surprisingly, these linear denoisers are approximately the optimal denoisers for a multivariate Gaussian distribution characterized by the empirical mean and covariance of the training dataset. This finding implies that diffusion models have the inductive bias towards capturing and utilizing the Gaussian structure (covariance information) of the training dataset for data generation. We empirically demonstrate that this inductive bias is a unique property of diffusion models in the generalization regime, which becomes increasingly evident when the model's capacity is relatively small compared to the training dataset size. In the case that the model is highly overparameterized, this inductive bias emerges during the initial training phases before the model fully memorizes its training data. Our study provides crucial insights into understanding the notable strong generalization phenomenon recently observed in real-world diffusion models.d6:T562,Large Language Models (LLMs) have exhibited an impressive ability to perform In-Context Learning (ICL) from only a few examples. Recent works have indicated that the functions learned by ICL can be represented through compressed vectors derived from the transformer. However, the working mechanisms and optimization of these vectors are yet to be thoroughly explored. In this paper, we address this gap by presenting a comprehensive analysis of these compressed vectors, drawing parallels to the parameters trained with gradient descent, and introduce the concept of state vector. Inspired by the works on model soup and momentum-based gradient descent, we propose inner and momentum optimization methods that are applied to refine the state vector progressively as test-time adaptation. Moreover, we simulate state vector aggregation in the multiple example setting, where demonstrations comprising numerous examples are usually too lengthy for regular ICL, and further propose a divide-and-conquer aggregation method to address this challenge. We conduct extensive experiments using Llama-2 and GPT-J in both zero-shot setting and few-shot setting. The experimental results show that our optimization method effectively enhances the state vector and achieves the state-of-the-art performance on diverse tasks. Code is available at https://github.com/HITsz-TMG/ICL-State-Vectord7:T4f8,Standard Large Language Models (LLMs) struggle with handling dialogues with long contexts due to efficiency and consistency issues. According to our observation, dialogue contexts are highly structured, and the special token of End-of-Utterance (EoU) in dialogues has the potential to aggregate information. We refer to the EoU tokens as ``conversational attention sinks'' (conv-attn sinks). Accordingly, we introduce StreamingDialogue, which compresses long dialogue history into conv-attn sinks with minimal losses, and thus reduces computational complexity quadratically with the number of sinks (i.e., the number of utterances). Current LLMs already demonstrate the ability to handle long context window, e.g., a window size of 200K or more. To this end, by compressing utterances into EoUs, our method has the potential to handle more than 200K of utterances, resulting in a prolonged dialogue learning. In order to minimize information losses from reconstruction after compression, we design two learning strategies of short-memory reconstruction (SMR) and long-memory reactivation (LMR). Our method outperforms strong baselines in dialogue tasks and achieves a 4 $\times$ speedup while reducing memory usage by 18 $\times$ compared to dense attention recomputation.d8:T556,Parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT) methods effectively adapt large language models (LLMs) to diverse downstream tasks, reducing storage and GPU memory demands. Despite these advantages, several applications pose new challenges to PEFT beyond mere parameter efficiency. One notable challenge involves the efficient deployment of LLMs equipped with multiple task- or user-specific adapters, particularly when different adapters are needed for distinct requests within the same batch. Another challenge is the interpretability of LLMs, which is crucial for understanding how LLMs function. Previous studies introduced various approaches to address different challenges. In this paper, we introduce a novel method, RoAd, which employs a straightforward 2D rotation to adapt LLMs and addresses all the above challenges: (1) RoAd is remarkably parameter-efficient, delivering optimal performance on GLUE, eight commonsense reasoning tasks and four arithmetic reasoning tasks with <0.1% trainable parameters; (2) RoAd facilitates the efficient serving of requests requiring different adapters within a batch, with an overhead comparable to element-wise multiplication instead of batch matrix multiplication; (3) RoAd enhances LLM's interpretability through integration within a framework of distributed interchange intervention, demonstrated via composition experiments.d9:T637,While large language models (LLMs) showcase unprecedented capabilities, they also exhibit certain inherent limitations when facing seemingly trivial tasks. 
A prime example is the recently debated "reversal curse", which surfaces when models, having been trained on the fact "A is B", struggle to generalize this knowledge to infer that "B is A".
In this paper, we examine the manifestation of the reversal curse across various tasks and delve into both the generalization abilities and the problem-solving mechanisms of LLMs. This investigation leads to a series of significant insights:
(1) LLMs are able to generalize to "B is A" when both A and B are presented in the context as in the case of a multiple-choice question.
(2) This generalization ability is highly correlated to the structure of the fact "A is B" in the training documents. For example, this generalization only applies to biographies structured in "[Name] is [Description]" but not to "[Description] is [Name]".
(3) We propose and verify the hypothesis that LLMs possess an inherent bias in fact recalling during knowledge application, which explains and underscores the importance of the document structure to successful learning.
(4) The negative impact of this bias on the downstream performance of LLMs can hardly be mitigated through training alone.
Based on these intriguing findings, our work not only presents a novel perspective for interpreting LLMs' generalization abilities from their intrinsic working mechanism but also provides new insights for the development of more effective learning methods for LLMs.da:T4c8,Empirically, large-scale deep learning models often satisfy a neural scaling law: the test error of the trained model improves polynomially as the model size and data size grow. However, conventional wisdom suggests the test error consists of approximation, bias, and variance errors, where the variance error increases with model size. This disagrees with the general form of neural scaling laws, which predict that increasing model size monotonically improves performance.

We study the theory of scaling laws in an infinite dimensional linear regression setup. Specifically, we consider a model with $M$ parameters as a linear function of sketched covariates. The model is trained by one-pass stochastic gradient descent (SGD) using $N$ data. Assuming the optimal parameter satisfies a Gaussian prior and the data covariance matrix has a power-law spectrum of degree $a>1$, we show that the reducible part of the test error is $\Theta(M^{-(a-1)} + N^{-(a-1)/a})$. The variance error, which increases with $M$, is dominated by the other errors due to the implicit regularization of SGD, thus disappearing from the bound. Our theory is consistent with the empirical neural scaling laws and verified by numerical simulation.db:T55b,Quantization of large language models (LLMs) faces significant challenges, particularly due to the presence of outlier activations that impede efficient low-bit representation. Traditional approaches predominantly address Normal Outliers, which are activations across all tokens with relatively large magnitudes. However, these methods struggle with smoothing Massive Outliers that display significantly larger values, which leads to significant performance degradation in low-bit quantization. In this paper, we introduce DuQuant, a novel approach that utilizes rotation and permutation transformations to more effectively mitigate both massive and normal outliers. First, DuQuant starts by constructing the rotation matrix, using specific outlier dimensions as prior knowledge, to redistribute outliers to adjacent channels by block-wise rotation. Second, We further employ a zigzag permutation to balance the distribution of outliers across blocks, thereby reducing block-wise variance. A subsequent rotation further smooths the activation landscape, enhancing model performance. DuQuant simplifies the quantization process and excels in managing outliers, outperforming the state-of-the-art baselines across various sizes and types of LLMs on multiple tasks, even with 4-bit weight-activation quantization. Our code is available at https://github.com/Hsu1023/DuQuant.dc:T49f,Large language models (LLMs) have garnered significant attention for their remarkable capabilities across various domains, whose vast parameter scales present challenges for practical deployment. Structured pruning is an effective method to balance model performance with efficiency, but performance restoration under computational resource constraints is a principal challenge in pruning LLMs. Therefore, we present a low-cost and fast structured pruning method for LLMs named SlimGPT based on the Optimal Brain Surgeon framework. We propose Batched Greedy Pruning for rapid and near-optimal pruning, which enhances the accuracy of head-wise pruning error estimation through grouped Cholesky decomposition and improves the pruning efficiency of FFN via Dynamic Group Size, thereby achieving approximate local optimal pruning results within one hour. Besides, we explore the limitations of layer-wise pruning from the perspective of error accumulation and propose Incremental Pruning Ratio, a non-uniform pruning strategy to reduce performance degradation. Experimental results on the LLaMA benchmark show that SlimGPT outperforms other methods and achieves state-of-the-art results.dd:T500,Trained on vast corpora of human language, language models demonstrate emergent human-like reasoning abilities. Yet they are still far from true intelligence, which opens up intriguing opportunities to explore the parallels of humans and model behaviors. In this work, we study the ability to skip steps in reasoning—a hallmark of human expertise developed through practice. Unlike humans, who may skip steps to enhance efficiency or to reduce cognitive load, models do not inherently possess such motivations to minimize reasoning steps. To address this, we introduce a controlled framework that stimulates step-skipping behavior by iteratively refining models to generate shorter and accurate reasoning paths. Empirical results indicate that models can develop the step skipping ability under our guidance. Moreover, after fine-tuning on expanded datasets that include both complete and skipped reasoning sequences, the models can not only resolve tasks with increased efficiency without sacrificing accuracy, but also exhibit comparable and even enhanced generalization capabilities in out-of-domain scenarios. Our work presents the first exploration into human-like step-skipping ability and provides fresh perspectives on how such cognitive abilities can benefit AI models.de:T47a,The advancement of function-calling agent models requires diverse, reliable, and high-quality datasets. This paper presents APIGen, an automated data generation pipeline designed to synthesize high-quality datasets for function-calling applications. We leverage APIGen and collect 3,673 executable APIs across 21 different categories to generate diverse function-calling datasets in a scalable and structured manner. Each data in our dataset is verified through three hierarchical stages: format checking, actual function executions, and semantic verification, improving its reliability and correctness. We demonstrate that models trained with our curated datasets, even with only 7B parameters, can achieve state-of-the-art performance on the Berkeley Function-Calling Benchmark, outperforming multiple GPT-4 models. Moreover, our 1B model achieves exceptional performance, surpassing GPT-3.5-Turbo and Claude-3 Haiku. We release a dataset containing 60,000 high-quality entries, aiming to advance the field of function-calling agent domains. The dataset and models are available on the project homepage \url{https://apigen-pipeline.github.io/}.df:T618,In this work, we propose a novel method named \textbf{Auto}mated \textbf{P}rocess-\textbf{S}upervised \textbf{V}erifier (\textbf{\textsc{AutoPSV}}) to enhance the reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs) by automatically annotating the reasoning steps.
\textsc{AutoPSV} begins by training a verification model on the correctness of final answers, enabling it to generate automatic process annotations. 
This verification model assigns a confidence score to each reasoning step, indicating the probability of arriving at the correct final answer from that point onward.
We detect relative changes in the verification's confidence scores across reasoning steps to automatically annotate the reasoning process, enabling error detection even in scenarios where ground truth answers are unavailable. 
This alleviates the need for numerous manual annotations or the high computational costs associated with model-induced annotation approaches.
We experimentally validate that the step-level confidence changes learned by the verification model trained on the final answer correctness can effectively identify errors in the reasoning steps.
We demonstrate that the verification model, when trained on process annotations generated by \textsc{AutoPSV}, exhibits improved performance in selecting correct answers from multiple LLM-generated outputs.
Notably, we achieve substantial improvements across five datasets in mathematics and commonsense reasoning.  The source code of \textsc{AutoPSV} is available at \url{https://github.com/rookie-joe/AutoPSV}.e0:T669,Large Language Models (LLMs) are being used for a wide variety of tasks. While they are capable of generating human-like responses, they can also produce undesirable output including potentially harmful information, racist or sexist language, and hallucinations. Alignment methods are designed to reduce such undesirable outputs via techniques such as fine-tuning, prompt engineering, and representation engineering. However, existing methods face several challenges: some require costly fine-tuning for every alignment task; some do not adequately remove undesirable concepts, failing alignment; some remove benign concepts, lowering the linguistic capabilities of LLMs. To address these issues, we propose Parsimonious Concept Engineering (PaCE), a novel activation engineering framework for alignment. First, to sufficiently model the concepts, we construct a large-scale concept dictionary in the activation space, in which each atom corresponds to a semantic concept. Given any alignment task, we instruct a concept partitioner to efficiently annotate the concepts as benign or undesirable. Then, at inference time, we decompose the LLM activations along the concept dictionary via sparse coding, to accurately represent the activations as linear combinations of benign and undesirable components. By removing the latter ones from the activations, we reorient the behavior of the LLM towards the alignment goal. We conduct experiments on tasks such as response detoxification, faithfulness enhancement, and sentiment revising, and show that PaCE achieves state-of-the-art alignment performance while maintaining linguistic capabilities.e1:T430,This work presents BAdam, an optimization method that leverages the block coordinate descent (BCD) framework with Adam's update rule. BAdam offers a memory efficient approach to the full parameter finetuning of large language models. We conduct 
  a theoretical convergence analysis for BAdam in the deterministic case. Experimentally, we apply BAdam to finetune the Llama 3-8B and Llama 3-70B models using a single RTX3090-24GB GPU and 4 A100-80GB GPUs, respectively. The results confirm BAdam's efficiency in terms of memory usage, running time, and optimization capability. Furthermore, the downstream performance evaluation based on MT-bench and math benchmarks shows that BAdam outperforms existing memory efficient baselines such as LoRA. It also demonstrates that BAdam can achieve comparable or even superior performance compared to Adam. Finally, the ablation study using SGD's update rule illustrates the suitability of BCD for finetuning LLMs. Our code can be easily integrated into any PyTorch-based codebase and is available at https://github.com/Ledzy/BAdam.e2:T490,Public LLMs such as the Llama 2-Chat underwent alignment training and were considered safe. Recently Qi et al. [2024] reported that even benign fine-tuning on seemingly safe datasets can give rise to unsafe behaviors in the models. The current paper is about methods and best practices to mitigate such loss of alignment. We focus on the setting where a public model is fine-tuned before serving users for specific usage, where the model should improve on the downstream task while maintaining alignment. Through extensive experiments on several chat models (Meta's Llama 2-Chat, Mistral AI's Mistral 7B Instruct v0.2, and OpenAI's GPT-3.5 Turbo), this paper uncovers that the prompt templates used during fine-tuning and inference play a crucial role in preserving safety alignment, and proposes the ``Pure Tuning, Safe Testing'' (PTST) strategy -- fine-tune models without a safety prompt, but include it at test time. This seemingly counterintuitive strategy incorporates an intended distribution shift to encourage alignment preservation. Fine-tuning experiments on GSM8K, ChatDoctor, and OpenOrca show that PTST significantly reduces the rise of unsafe behaviors.e3:T5a4,Reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a pivotal technique for fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) on specific tasks. However, prevailing RL fine-tuning methods predominantly rely on PPO and its variants. Though these algorithms are effective in general RL settings, they often exhibit suboptimal performance and vulnerability to distribution collapse when applied to the fine-tuning of LLMs. In this paper, we propose CORY, extending the RL fine-tuning of LLMs to a sequential cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning framework, to leverage the inherent coevolution and emergent capabilities of multi-agent systems. In CORY, the LLM to be fine-tuned is initially duplicated into two autonomous agents: a pioneer and an observer. The pioneer generates responses based on queries, while the observer generates responses using both the queries and the pioneer's responses. The two agents are trained together. During training, the agents exchange roles periodically, fostering cooperation and coevolution between them. Experiments evaluate CORY's performance by fine-tuning GPT-2 and Llama-2 under subjective and objective reward functions on the IMDB Review and GSM8K datasets, respectively. Results show that CORY outperforms PPO in terms of policy optimality, resistance to distribution collapse, and training robustness, thereby underscoring its potential as a superior methodology for refining LLMs in real-world applications.e4:T769,Large language models (LLMs) based on decoder-only transformers have demonstrated superior text understanding capabilities compared to CLIP and T5-series models. However, the paradigm for utilizing current advanced LLMs in text-to-image diffusion models remains to be explored. We observed an unusual phenomenon: directly using a large language model as the prompt encoder significantly degrades the prompt-following ability in image generation. We identified two main obstacles behind this issue. One is the misalignment between the next token prediction training in LLM and the requirement for discriminative prompt features in diffusion models. The other is the intrinsic positional bias introduced by the decoder-only architecture. To deal with this issue, we propose a novel framework to fully harness the capabilities of LLMs. Through the carefully designed usage guidance, we effectively enhance the text representation capability for prompt encoding and eliminate its inherent positional bias. This allows us to integrate state-of-the-art LLMs into the text-to-image generation model flexibly. Furthermore, we also provide an effective manner to fuse multiple LLMs into our framework. Considering the excellent performance and scaling capabilities demonstrated by the transformer architecture, we further design an LLM-Infused Diffusion Transformer (LI-DiT) based on the framework. We conduct extensive experiments to validate LI-DiT across model size and data size. Benefiting from the inherent ability of the LLMs and our innovative designs, the prompt understanding performance of LI-DiT easily surpasses state-of-the-art open-source models as well as mainstream closed-source commercial models including Stable Diffusion 3, DALL-E 3, and Midjourney V6. The LLM-Infused Diffuser framework is also one of the core technologies powering SenseMirage, a highly advanced text-to-image model.e5:T518,Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) is widely used to train large language models (LLMs). However, it is unclear whether LLMs accurately learn the underlying preferences in human feedback data. We coin the term **Learned Feedback Pattern** (LFP) for patterns in an LLM's activations learned during RLHF that improve its performance on the fine-tuning task. We hypothesize that LLMs with LFPs accurately aligned to the fine-tuning feedback exhibit consistent activation patterns for outputs that would have received similar feedback during RLHF. To test this, we train probes to estimate the feedback signal implicit in the activations of a fine-tuned LLM. We then compare these estimates to the true feedback, measuring how accurate the LFPs are to the fine-tuning feedback. Our probes are trained on a condensed, sparse and interpretable representation of LLM activations, making it easier to correlate features of the input with our probe's predictions. We validate our probes by comparing the neural features they correlate with positive feedback inputs against the features GPT-4 describes and classifies as related to LFPs. Understanding LFPs can help minimize discrepancies between LLM behavior and training objectives, which is essential for the **safety** and **alignment** of LLMs.e6:T42d,We propose a new variant of the Adam optimizer called MicroAdam that specifically minimizes memory overheads, while maintaining theoretical convergence guarantees. We achieve this by compressing the gradient information before it is fed into the optimizer state, 
thereby reducing its memory footprint significantly. We control the resulting compression  error via a novel instance of the classical *error feedback* mechanism from distributed optimization in which *the error correction information is itself compressed* to allow for practical memory gains. We prove that the resulting approach maintains theoretical convergence guarantees competitive to those of AMSGrad, while providing good practical performance. Specifically, we show that MicroAdam can be implemented efficiently on GPUs: on both million-scale (BERT) and billion-scale (LLaMA) models, MicroAdam provides practical convergence competitive to that of the uncompressed Adam baseline, with  lower memory usage and similar running time. Our code is available at https://github.com/IST-DASLab/MicroAdam.e7:T49c,Ensuring the safety of large language model (LLM) applications is essential for developing trustworthy artificial intelligence. Current LLM safety benchmarks have two limitations. First, they focus solely on either discriminative or generative evaluation paradigms while ignoring their interconnection. Second, they rely on standardized inputs, overlooking the effects of widespread prompting techniques, such as system prompts, few-shot demonstrations, and chain-of-thought prompting. To overcome these issues, we developed SG-Bench, a novel benchmark to assess the generalization of LLM safety across various tasks and prompt types. This benchmark integrates both generative and discriminative evaluation tasks and includes extended data to examine the impact of prompt engineering and jailbreak on LLM safety. Our assessment of 3 advanced proprietary LLMs and 10 open-source LLMs with the benchmark reveals that most LLMs perform worse on discriminative tasks than generative ones, and are highly susceptible to prompts, indicating poor generalization in safety alignment. We also explain these findings quantitatively and qualitatively to provide insights for future research.e8:T52e,Rigorous software testing is crucial for developing and maintaining high-quality code, making automated test generation a promising avenue for both improving software quality and boosting the effectiveness of code generation methods. However, while code generation with Large Language Models (LLMs) is an extraordinarily active research area, test generation remains relatively unexplored. We address this gap and investigate the capability of LLM-based Code Agents to formalize user issues into test cases. To this end, we propose a novel benchmark based on popular GitHub repositories, containing real-world issues, ground-truth bug-fixes, and golden tests.  We find that LLMs generally perform surprisingly well at generating relevant test cases, with Code Agents designed for code repair exceeding the performance of systems designed specifically for test generation. Further, as test generation is a similar but more structured task than code generation, it allows for a more fine-grained analysis using issue reproduction rate and coverage changes, providing a dual metric for analyzing systems designed for code repair. Finally, we find that generated tests are an effective filter for proposed code fixes, doubling the precision of SWE-Agent. We release all data and code at https://github.com/logic-star-ai/SWT-Bench.e9:T5a3,We consider scenarios where a very accurate (often small) predictive model using restricted features is available when training a full-featured (often larger) model. This restricted model may be thought of as ``side-information'', and can come either from an auxiliary dataset or from the same dataset by forcing the restriction. How can the restricted model be useful to the full model? To answer this, we introduce a methodology called Induced Model Matching (IMM). IMM aligns the context-restricted, or induced, version of the large model with the restricted model. We relate IMM to approaches such as noising, which is implicit in addressing the problem, and reverse knowledge distillation from weak teachers, which is explicit but does not exploit restriction being the nature of the weakness. We show that these prior methods can be thought of as approximations to IMM and can be problematic in terms of consistency. Experimentally, we first motivate IMM using logistic regression as a toy example. We then explore it in language modeling, the application that initially inspired it, and demonstrate it on both LSTM and transformer full models, using bigrams as restricted models. We lastly give a simple RL example, which shows that POMDP policies can help learn better MDP policies. The IMM principle is thus generally applicable in common scenarios where restricted data is cheaper to collect or restricted models are easier to learn.ea:T529,Large language models (LLMs) targeting different deployment scales and sizes are currently produced by training each variant from scratch; this is extremely compute-intensive. In this paper, we investigate if pruning an existing LLM and then re-training it with a fraction <3% of the original training data can be a suitable alternative to repeated, full retraining. To this end, we develop a set of practical and effective **compression best practices** for LLMs that combine depth, width, attention and MLP pruning with knowledge distillation-based retraining; we arrive at these best practices through a detailed empirical exploration of pruning strategies for each axis, methods to combine axes, distillation strategies, and search techniques for arriving at optimal compressed architectures. We use this guide to compress the Nemotron-4 family of LLMs by a factor of 2-4x, and compare their performance to similarly-sized models on a variety of language modeling tasks. On these tasks, we perform better than Nemotron-3 8B and LLaMa2 7B using **up to 40x** fewer training tokens}, on par with Mistral 7B and Gemma 7B using **up to 85x fewer tokens** and slightly worse than LLaMa3 8B using **up to 159x fewer tokens**. Our models also compare favorably to state-of-the-art compression techniques from the literature.eb:T478,We formalize the problem of prompt compression for large language models (LLMs) and present a framework to unify token-level prompt compression methods which create hard prompts for black-box models. We derive the distortion-rate function for this setup as a linear program, and provide an efficient algorithm to compute this fundamental limit via the dual of the linear program. Using the distortion-rate function as the baseline, we study the performance of existing compression schemes on a synthetic dataset consisting of prompts generated from a Markov chain, natural language queries, and their respective answers. Our empirical analysis demonstrates the criticality of query-aware prompt compression, where the compressor has knowledge of the downstream task/query for the black-box LLM. We show that there is a large gap between the performance of current prompt compression methods and the optimal strategy, and propose Adaptive QuerySelect, a query-aware, variable-rate adaptation of a prior work to close the gap. We extend our experiments to a small natural language dataset to further confirm our findings on our synthetic dataset.ec:T576,Evaluating large language models (LLMs) is challenging. Traditional ground-truth- based benchmarks fail to capture the comprehensiveness and nuance of real-world queries, while LLM-as-judge benchmarks suffer from grading biases and limited query quantity. Both of them may also become contaminated over time. User- facing evaluation, such as Chatbot Arena, provides reliable signals but is costly and slow. In this work, we propose MixEval, a new paradigm for establishing efficient, gold-standard LLM evaluation by strategically mixing off-the-shelf bench- marks. It bridges (1) comprehensive and well-distributed real-world user queries and (2) efficient and fairly-graded ground-truth-based benchmarks, by matching queries mined from the web with similar queries from existing benchmarks. Based on MixEval, we further build MixEval-Hard, which offers more room for model improvement. Our benchmarks’ advantages lie in (1) a 0.96 model ranking correlation with Chatbot Arena arising from the highly impartial query distribution and grading mechanism, (2) fast, cheap, and reproducible execution (6% of the time and cost of MMLU), and (3) dynamic evaluation enabled by the rapid and stable data update pipeline. We provide extensive meta-evaluation and analysis for our and existing LLM benchmarks to deepen the community’s understanding of LLM evaluation and guide future research directions.ed:T5b3,Recently, there has been growing evidence that if the width and depth of a neural network are scaled toward the so-called rich feature learning limit ($\mu$P and its depth extension), then some hyperparameters --- such as the learning rate --- exhibit transfer from small to very large models. From an optimization perspective, this phenomenon is puzzling, as it implies that the loss landscape is consistently similar across very different model sizes. In this work, we study the landscape through the lens of the Hessian, with a focus on its largest eigenvalue (i.e. the sharpness), and find that certain spectral properties under $\mu$P are largely independent of the width and depth of the network along the training trajectory. We name this property *super consistency* of the landscape. On the other hand, we show that in the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) and other scaling regimes, the sharpness exhibits very different dynamics at different scales. But what causes these differences in the sharpness dynamics? Through a connection between the Hessian's and the NTK's spectrum, we argue that the cause lies in the presence (for $\mu$P) or progressive absence (for the NTK scaling) of feature learning.
We corroborate our claims with a substantial suite of experiments, covering a wide range of datasets and architectures: from ResNets and Vision Transformers trained on benchmark vision datasets to Transformers-based language models trained on WikiText.ee:T5ae,Modern generative models demonstrate impressive capabilities, likely stemming from an ability to identify and manipulate abstract concepts underlying their training data. However, fundamental questions remain: what determines the concepts a model learns, the order in which it learns them, and its ability to manipulate those concepts? To address these questions, we propose analyzing a model’s learning dynamics via a framework we call the concept space, where each axis represents an independent concept underlying the data generating process. By characterizing learning dynamics in this space, we identify how the speed at which a concept is learned, and hence the order of concept learning, is controlled by properties of the data we term concept signal. Further, we observe moments of sudden turns in the direction of a model’s learning dynamics in concept space. Surprisingly, these points precisely correspond to the emergence of hidden capabilities, i.e., where latent interventions show the model possesses the capability to manipulate a concept, but these capabilities cannot yet be elicited via naive input prompting. While our results focus on synthetically defined toy datasets, we hypothesize a general claim on emergence of hidden capabilities may hold: generative models possess latent capabilities that emerge suddenly and consistently during training, though a model might not exhibit these capabilities under naive input prompting.ef:T5c6,Large Language Models (LLMs) struggle with reliably generating highly structured outputs, such as program code, mathematical formulas, or well-formed markup. Constrained decoding approaches mitigate this problem by greedily restricting what tokens an LLM can output at each step to guarantee that the output matches a given constraint. Specifically, in grammar-constrained decoding (GCD), the LLM's output must follow a given grammar. In this paper we demonstrate that GCD techniques (and in general constrained decoding techniques) can distort the LLM's distribution, leading to outputs that are grammatical but appear with likelihoods that are not proportional to the ones given by the LLM, and so ultimately are low-quality. We call the problem of aligning sampling with a grammar constraint, grammar-aligned decoding (GAD), and propose adaptive sampling with approximate expected futures (ASAp), a decoding algorithm that guarantees the output to be grammatical while provably producing outputs that match the conditional probability of the LLM's distribution conditioned on the given grammar constraint. Our algorithm uses prior sample outputs to soundly overapproximate the future grammaticality of different output prefixes. Our evaluation on code generation and structured NLP tasks shows how ASAp often produces outputs with higher likelihood (according to the LLM's distribution) than existing GCD techniques, while still enforcing the desired grammatical constraints.f0:T465,Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) models maximize the mutual information between text and visual modalities to learn representations. This makes the nature of the training data a significant factor in the efficacy of CLIP for downstream tasks. However, the lack of compositional diversity in contemporary image-text datasets limits the compositional reasoning ability of CLIP. We show that generating ``hard'' negative captions via in-context learning and synthesizing corresponding negative images with text-to-image generators offers a solution. We introduce a novel contrastive pre-training strategy that leverages these hard negative captions and images in an alternating fashion to train CLIP. We demonstrate that our method, named TripletCLIP, when applied to existing datasets such as CC3M and CC12M, enhances the compositional capabilities of CLIP, resulting in an absolute improvement of over 9% on the SugarCrepe benchmark on an equal computational budget, as well as improvements in zero-shot image classification and image retrieval. Our code, models, and data are available at: tripletclip.github.io.f1:T50c,Federated learning works by aggregating locally computed gradients from multiple clients, thus enabling collaborative training without sharing private client data. However, prior work has shown that the data can actually be recovered by the server using so-called gradient inversion attacks. While these attacks perform well when applied on images, they are limited in the text domain and only permit approximate reconstruction of small batches and short input sequences. In this work, we propose DAGER, the first algorithm to recover whole batches of input text exactly. DAGER leverages the low-rank structure of self-attention layer gradients and the discrete nature of token embeddings to efficiently check if a given token sequence is part of the client data. We use this check to exactly recover full batches in the honest-but-curious setting without any prior on the data for both encoder and decoder-based architectures using exhaustive heuristic search and a greedy approach, respectively. We provide an efficient GPU implementation of DAGER and show experimentally that it recovers full batches of size up to 128 on large language models (LLMs), beating prior attacks in speed (20x at same batch size), scalability (10x larger batches), and reconstruction quality (ROUGE-1/2 > 0.99).f2:T4ef,Zero-shot and in-context learning enable solving tasks without model fine-tuning, making them essential for developing generative model solutions. Therefore, it is crucial to understand whether a pretrained model can be prompted to approximate any function, i.e., whether it is a universal in-context approximator. While it was recently shown that transformer models do possess this property, these results rely on their attention mechanism. Hence, these findings do not apply to fully recurrent architectures like RNNs, LSTMs, and the increasingly popular SSMs. We demonstrate that RNNs, LSTMs, GRUs, Linear RNNs, and linear gated architectures such as Mamba and Hawk/Griffin can also serve be universal in-context approximators. To streamline our argument, we introduce a programming language called LSRL that compiles to these fully recurrent architectures. LSRL may be of independent interest for further studies of fully recurrent models, such as constructing interpretability benchmarks. We also study the role of multiplicative gating and observe that architectures incorporating such gating (e.g., LSTMs, GRUs, Hawk/Griffin) can implement certain operations more stably, making them more viable candidates for practical in-context universal approximation.f3:T505,Fine-tuning is a crucial process for adapting large language models (LLMs) to diverse applications. In certain scenarios, such as multi-tenant serving, deploying multiple LLMs becomes necessary to meet complex demands. Recent studies suggest decomposing a fine-tuned LLM into a base model and corresponding delta weights, which are then compressed using low-rank or low-bit approaches to reduce costs. In this work, we observe that existing low-rank and low-bit compression methods can significantly harm the model performance for task-specific fine-tuned LLMs (e.g., WizardMath for math problems). Motivated by the long-tail distribution of singular values in the delta weights, we propose a delta quantization approach using mixed-precision. This method employs higher-bit representation for singular vectors corresponding to larger singular values. We evaluate our approach on various fine-tuned LLMs, including math LLMs, code LLMs, chat LLMs, and even VLMs. Experimental results demonstrate that our approach performs comparably to full fine-tuned LLMs, surpassing both low-rank and low-bit baselines by a considerable margin. Additionally, we show that our method is compatible with various backbone LLMs, such as Llama-2, Llama-3, and Mistral, highlighting its generalizability.f4:T67b,While finetuning language models from pairwise preferences has proven remarkably effective, the underspecified nature of natural language presents critical challenges. Direct preference feedback is uninterpretable, difficult to provide where multidimensional criteria may apply, and often inconsistent, either because it is based on incomplete instructions or provided by diverse principals. To address these challenges, we consider the two-step preference modeling procedure that first resolves the under-specification by selecting a context, and then evaluates preference with respect to the chosen context. We decompose reward modeling error according to these two steps, which suggests that supervising context in addition to context-specific preference may be a viable approach to aligning models with diverse human preferences. For this to work, the ability of models to evaluate context-specific preference is critical. To this end, we contribute context-conditioned preference datasets and accompanying experiments that investigate the ability of language models to evaluate context-specific preference. Unlike past datasets, where context-specific preference is highly correlated with general preference, our "preference reversal" datasets disentangle context-specific and general preferences to isolate context-specific capabilities. We use our datasets to (1) show that existing preference models benefit from, but fail to fully consider, added context, (2) finetune a context-aware reward model with context-specific performance exceeding that of GPT-4 and Llama 3 70B, and (3) investigate the potential value of context-aware preference modeling.f5:T64c,Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) is a powerful paradigm for aligning foundation models to human values and preferences. However, current RLHF techniques cannot account for the naturally occurring differences in individual human preferences across a diverse population. When these differences arise, traditional RLHF frameworks simply average over them, leading to inaccurate rewards and poor performance for individual subgroups. To address the need for pluralistic alignment, we develop a class of multimodal RLHF methods. Our proposed techniques are based on a latent variable formulation - inferring a novel user-specific latent and learning reward models and policies conditioned on this latent without additional user-specific data. While conceptually simple, we show that in practice, this reward modeling requires careful algorithmic considerations around model architecture and reward scaling. To empirically validate our proposed technique, we first show that it can provide a way to combat underspecification in simulated control problems, inferring and optimizing user-specific reward functions. Next, we conduct experiments on pluralistic language datasets representing diverse user preferences and demonstrate improved reward function accuracy. We additionally show the benefits of this probabilistic framework in terms of measuring uncertainty, and actively learning user preferences. This work enables learning from diverse populations of users with divergent preferences, an important challenge that naturally occurs in problems from robot learning to foundation model alignment.f6:T551,Dense linear layers are the dominant computational bottleneck in large neural networks, presenting a critical need for more efficient alternatives. Previous efforts to develop alternatives have focused on a small number of hand-crafted structured matrices, and have neglected to investigate whether these structures can surpass dense layers in terms of compute-optimal scaling laws when both the model size and training examples are optimally allocated. In this work, we present a unifying framework that enables searching among all linear operators expressible via an Einstein summation. This framework encompasses many previously proposed structures, such as low-rank, Kronecker, Tensor-Train, and Monarch, along with many novel structures. We develop a taxonomy of all such operators based on their computational and algebraic properties, which provides insights into their scaling laws. Combining these insights with empirical evaluation, we identify a subset of structures that achieve equal or better performance than dense layers as a function of training compute. To further improve their compute efficiency, we develop a natural extension of these performant structures that convert them into a sparse Mixture-of-Experts layer. The resulting layer significantly outperforms dense layers in compute-optimal training efficiency for GPT-2 language models.f7:T594,Foundation models have made significant strides in understanding the genomic language of DNA sequences. However, previous models typically adopt the tokenization methods designed for natural language, which are unsuitable for DNA sequences due to their unique characteristics. In addition, the optimal approach to tokenize DNA remains largely under-explored, and may not be intuitively understood by humans even if discovered. To address these challenges, we introduce MxDNA, a novel framework where the model autonomously learns an effective DNA tokenization strategy through gradient decent. MxDNA employs a sparse Mixture of Convolution Experts coupled with a deformable convolution to model the tokenization process, with the discontinuous, overlapping, and ambiguous nature of meaningful genomic segments explicitly considered. On Nucleotide Transformer Benchmarks and Genomic Benchmarks, MxDNA demonstrates superior performance to existing methods with less pretraining data and time, highlighting its effectiveness. Finally, we show that MxDNA learns unique tokenization strategy distinct to those of previous methods and captures genomic functionalities at a token level during self-supervised pretraining. Our MxDNA aims to provide a new perspective on DNA tokenization, potentially offering broad applications in various domains and yielding profound insights. Code is available at https://github.com/qiaoqiaoLF/MxDNA.f8:T463,Transformers have achieved significant success in natural language modeling because of their exceptional capabilities to combine contextual information and global knowledge, yet their theoretical basis remains unclear. In this paper, we first propose Sparse Contextual Bigram (SCB), a natural extension to the classical bigram model, where the generation of the next token depends on a sparse set of earlier positions determined by the last token. We investigate the training dynamics and sample complexity of learning SCB using a one-layer linear transformer with a gradient-based algorithm. We show that when trained from scratch, the training process can be split into an initial sample-intensive stage where the correlation is boosted from zero to a nontrivial value, followed by a more sample-efficient stage of further improvement. Additionally, we prove that, provided a nontrivial correlation between the downstream and pretraining tasks, finetuning from a pretrained model allows us to bypass the initial sample-intensive stage. We also empirically demonstrate that our algorithm can outperform SGD in our setting.f9:T4ca,The remarkable capability of over-parameterised neural networks to generalise effectively has been explained by invoking a ``simplicity bias'': neural networks prevent overfitting by initially learning simple classifiers before progressing to more complex, non-linear functions. While simplicity biases have been described theoretically and experimentally in feed-forward networks for supervised learning, the extent to which they also explain the remarkable success of transformers trained with self-supervised techniques remains unclear. In our study, we demonstrate that transformers, trained on natural language data, also display a simplicity bias. Specifically, they sequentially learn many-body interactions among input tokens, reaching a saturation point in the prediction error for low-degree interactions while continuing to learn high-degree interactions.  To conduct this analysis, we develop a procedure to generate \textit{clones} of a given natural language data set, which rigorously capture the interactions between tokens up to a specified order. This approach opens up the possibilities of studying how interactions of different orders in the data affect learning, in natural language processing and beyond.fa:T58b,Releasing open-source large language models (LLMs) presents a dual-use risk since bad actors can easily fine-tune these models for harmful purposes. Even without the open release of weights, weight stealing and fine-tuning APIs make closed models vulnerable to harmful fine-tuning attacks (HFAs). While safety measures like preventing jailbreaks and improving safety guardrails are important, such measures can easily be reversed through fine-tuning. In this work, we propose Representation Noising (\textsf{\small RepNoise}), a defence mechanism that operates even when attackers have access to the weights. \textsf{\small RepNoise} works by removing information about harmful representations such that it is difficult to recover them during fine-tuning. Importantly, our defence is also able to generalize across different subsets of harm that have not been seen during the defence process as long as they are drawn from the same distribution of the attack set. Our method does not degrade the general capability of LLMs and retains the ability to train the model on harmless tasks. We provide empirical evidence that the efficacy of our defence lies in its ``depth'': the degree to which information about harmful representations is removed across {\em all layers} of the LLM. We also find areas where \textsf{\small RepNoise} still remains ineffective and highlight how those limitations can inform future research.fb:T571,As large language models (LLMs) become increasingly prevalent across many real-world applications, understanding and enhancing their robustness to adversarial attacks is of paramount importance. Existing methods for identifying adversarial prompts tend to focus on specific domains, lack diversity, or require extensive human annotations. To address these limitations, we present Rainbow Teaming, a novel black-box approach for producing a diverse collection of adversarial prompts. Rainbow Teaming casts adversarial prompt generation as a quality-diversity problem and uses open-ended search to generate prompts that are both effective and diverse. Focusing on the safety domain, we use Rainbow Teaming to target various state-of-the-art LLMs, including the Llama 2 and Llama 3 models. Our approach reveals hundreds of effective adversarial prompts, with an attack success rate exceeding 90% across all tested models. Furthermore, we demonstrate that prompts generated by Rainbow Teaming are highly transferable and that fine-tuning models with synthetic data generated by our method significantly enhances their safety without sacrificing general performance or helpfulness. We additionally explore the versatility of Rainbow Teaming by applying it to question answering and cybersecurity, showcasing its potential to drive robust open-ended self-improvement in a wide range of applications.fc:T402,Which transformer scaling regimes are able to perfectly solve different classes of algorithmic problems? While tremendous empirical advances have been attained by transformer-based neural networks, a theoretical understanding of their algorithmic reasoning capabilities in realistic parameter regimes is lacking. We investigate this question in terms of the network's depth, width, and number of extra tokens for algorithm execution. Our novel representational hierarchy separates 9 algorithmic reasoning problems into classes solvable by transformers in different realistic parameter scaling regimes. We prove that logarithmic depth is necessary and sufficient for tasks like graph connectivity, while single-layer transformers with small embedding dimensions can solve contextual retrieval tasks. We also support our theoretical analysis with ample empirical evidence using the GraphQA benchmark. These results show that transformers excel at many graph reasoning tasks, even outperforming specialized graph neural networks.fd:T50f,Previous studies on continual knowledge learning (CKL) in large language models (LLMs) have predominantly focused on approaches such as regularization, architectural modifications, and rehearsal techniques to mitigate catastrophic forgetting. However, these methods naively inherit the inefficiencies of standard training procedures, indiscriminately applying uniform weight across all tokens, which can lead to unnecessary parameter updates and increased forgetting. To address these shortcomings, we propose a novel CKL approach termed Train-Attention-Augmented Language Model (TAALM), which enhances learning efficiency by dynamically predicting and applying weights to tokens based on their usefulness. This method employs a meta-learning framework that optimizes token importance predictions, facilitating targeted knowledge updates and minimizing forgetting. Also, we observe that existing benchmarks do not clearly exhibit the trade-off between learning and retaining, therefore we propose a new benchmark, \textsc{LAMA-ckl}, to address this issue. Through experiments conducted on both newly introduced and established CKL benchmarks, TAALM proves the state-of-the-art performance upon the baselines, and also shows synergistic compatibility when integrated with previous CKL approaches.fe:T4c0,Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) has become the standard approach for aligning Large Language Models (LLMs) with human preferences, allowing LLMs to demonstrate remarkable abilities in various tasks.  Existing methods work by emulating the human preference at the single decision (turn) level, limiting their capabilities in settings that require planning or multi-turn interactions to achieve a long-term goal. In this paper, we address this issue by developing novel methods for Reinforcement Learning (RL) from preference feedback between two full multi-turn conversations.  In the tabular setting, we present a novel mirror-descent-based policy optimization algorithm for the general multi-turn preference-based RL problem, and prove its convergence to Nash equilibrium.  To evaluate performance, we create a new environment, Education Dialogue, where a teacher agent  guides  a  student  in  learning  a  random  topic,  and  show  that  a  deep  RL variant of our algorithm outperforms RLHF baselines. Finally, we show that in an environment with explicit rewards, our algorithm recovers the same performance as a reward-based RL baseline, despite relying solely on a weaker preference signal.ff:T4fc,Learning from AI feedback (LAIF) is a popular paradigm for improving the instruction-following abilities of powerful pre-trained language models. LAIF first performs supervised fine-tuning (SFT) using demonstrations from a teacher model and then further fine-tunes the model with reinforcement learning (RL) or direct preference optimization (DPO), using feedback from a critic model. While recent popular open-source models have demonstrated substantial improvements in performance from the RL step, in this paper we question whether the complexity of this RL step is truly warranted for AI feedback. We show that the improvements of the RL step are virtually entirely due to the widespread practice of using a weaker teacher model (e.g. GPT-3.5) for SFT data collection than the critic (e.g., GPT-4) used for AI feedback generation. Specifically, we show that simple supervised fine-tuning with GPT-4 as the teacher outperforms existing LAIF pipelines. More generally, we find that the gains from LAIF vary substantially across base model families, test-time evaluation protocols, and critic models. Finally, we provide a mechanistic explanation for when SFT may outperform the full two-step LAIF pipeline as well as suggestions for making LAIF maximally useful in practice.100:T405,Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities across various vision-language tasks. However, a generalist MLLM typically underperforms compared with a specialist MLLM on most VL tasks, which can be attributed to task interference. In this paper, we propose a mixture of multimodal experts (MoME) to mitigate task interference and obtain a generalist MLLM. Our MoME is composed of two key components, a mixture of vision experts (MoVE) and a mixture of language experts (MoLE). MoVE can adaptively modulate the features transformed from various vision encoders, and has a strong compatibility in transformation architecture. MoLE incorporates sparsely gated experts into LLMs to achieve painless improvements with roughly unchanged inference costs. In response to task interference, our MoME specializes in both vision and language modality to adapt to task discrepancies. Extensive experiments show that MoME significantly improves the performance of generalist MLLMs across various VL tasks.101:T41f,Inference on large language models (LLMs) can be expensive in terms of the
compute and memory costs involved, especially when long sequence lengths are
used. In particular, the self-attention mechanism used in LLM inference contributes
significantly to these costs, which has sparked an interest in approximating the self-attention 
computation to reduce such costs. In this work, we propose to approximate
self-attention by focusing on the dimensionality of key vectors computed in the
attention block. Our analysis reveals that key vectors lie in a significantly lower-dimensional 
space, consistently across several datasets and models. Exploiting this
observation, we propose Loki, a novel sparse attention method that ranks and selects
tokens in the KV-cache based on attention scores computed in low-dimensional
space. Our evaluations show that Loki is able to speed up the attention computation
due to reduced data movement (load/store) and compute costs while maintaining
the efficacy of the models better than other popular approximation methods.102:T4cd,While the Transformer architecture has achieved remarkable success across various domains, a thorough theoretical foundation explaining its optimization dynamics is yet to be fully developed. In this study, we aim to bridge this understanding gap by answering the following two core questions: (1) Which types of Transformer architectures allow Gradient Descent (GD) to achieve guaranteed convergence? and (2) Under what initial conditions and architectural specifics does the Transformer achieve rapid convergence during training? By analyzing the loss landscape of a single Transformer layer using Softmax and Gaussian attention kernels, our work provides concrete answers to these questions. Our findings demonstrate that, with appropriate weight initialization, GD can train a Transformer model (with either kernel type) to achieve a global optimal solution, especially when the input embedding dimension is large. Nonetheless, certain scenarios highlight potential pitfalls: training a Transformer using the Softmax attention kernel may sometimes lead to suboptimal local solutions. In contrast, the Gaussian attention kernel exhibits a much favorable behavior. Our empirical study further validate the theoretical findings.103:T617,Large language model (LLM) performance on reasoning problems typically does not generalize out of distribution. Previous work has claimed that this can be mitigated with chain of thought prompting-a method of demonstrating solution procedures-with the intuition that it is possible to in-context teach an LLM an algorithm for solving the problem. This paper presents a case study of chain of thought on problems from Blocksworld, a classical planning domain, and examines the performance of two state-of-the-art LLMs across two axes: generality of examples given in prompt, and complexity of problems queried with each prompt. While our problems are very simple, we only find meaningful performance improvements from chain of thought prompts when those prompts are exceedingly specific to their problem class, and that those improvements quickly deteriorate as the size n of the query-specified stack grows past the size of stacks shown in the examples. We also create scalable variants of three domains commonly studied in previous CoT papers and demonstrate the existence of similar failure modes. Our results hint that, contrary to previous claims in the literature, CoT's performance improvements do not stem from the model learning general algorithmic procedures via demonstrations but depend on carefully engineering highly problem specific prompts. This spotlights drawbacks of chain of thought, especially the sharp tradeoff between possible performance gains and the amount of human labor necessary to generate examples with correct reasoning traces.104:T8e9,When answering questions, large language models (LLMs) can convey not only an answer to the question, but a level of confidence about the answer being correct. This includes explicit markers of confidence (e.g. giving a numeric confidence score) as well as implicit markers, like using an authoritative tone or elaborating with additional knowledge of a subject. For LLMs to be trustworthy sources of knowledge, the confidence they convey should match their actual expertise on a topic; however, this is currently not the case, with most models tending towards overconfidence. To calibrate both implicit and explicit confidence markers, we introduce a pragmatic, listener-aware finetuning method (LACIE) that directly models the listener, considering not only whether an answer is right, but whether it will be accepted by a listener. Specifically, we cast calibration as a preference optimization problem, creating data via a two-agent speaker-listener game, where a speaker model’s outputs are judged by a simulated listener. We then finetune three different LLMs (Mistral-7B, Llama3-8B, Llama3-70B) with LACIE, and show that the models resulting from this multi-agent optimization are better calibrated on TriviaQA with respect to a simulated listener. Crucially, these trends transfer to human listeners, helping them correctly predict model correctness: we conduct a human evaluation where annotators accept or reject an LLM’s answers to trivia questions, finding that training with LACIE results in 47% fewer incorrect answers being accepted while maintaining the same level of acceptance for correct answers. Furthermore, LACIE generalizes to another dataset, resulting in a large increase in truthfulness on TruthfulQA when trained on TriviaQA. Our analysis indicates that LACIE leads to a better separation in confidence between correct and incorrect examples. Qualitatively, we find that a LACIE-trained model hedges more when uncertain and adopts implicit cues to signal certainty when it is correct, such as using an authoritative tone or including details. Finally, finetuning with our listener- aware method leads to an emergent increase in model abstention (e.g. saying “I don’t know”) for answers that are likely to be wrong, trading recall for precision.105:T490,The safe and effective deployment of Large Language Models (LLMs) involves a critical step called alignment, which ensures that the model's responses are in accordance with human preferences. Prevalent alignment techniques, such as DPO, PPO and their variants, align LLMs by changing the pre-trained model weights during a phase called post-training. While predominant, these post-training methods add substantial complexity before LLMs can be deployed. Inference-time alignment methods avoid the complex post-training step and instead bias the generation towards responses that are aligned with human preferences. The best-known inference-time alignment method, called Best-of-N, is as effective as the state-of-the-art post-training procedures. Unfortunately, Best-of-N requires vastly more resources at inference time than standard decoding strategies, which makes it computationally not viable. In this work, we introduce Speculative Rejection, a computationally-viable inference-time alignment algorithm. It generates high-scoring responses according to a given reward model, like Best-of-N does, while being between 16 to 32 times more computationally efficient.106:T4d9,As large language models gain widespread adoption, running them efficiently becomes a crucial task. Recent works on LLM inference use speculative decoding to achieve extreme speedups. However, most of these works implicitly design their algorithms for high-end datacenter hardware. In this work, we ask the opposite question: how fast can we run LLMs on consumer machines? Consumer GPUs can no longer fit the largest available models and must offload them to RAM or SSD. With parameter offloading, hundreds or thousands of tokens can be processed in batches within the same time as just one token, making it a natural fit for speculative decoding. We propose SpecExec (Speculative Execution), a simple parallel decoding method that can generate up to 20 tokens per target model iteration for popular LLM families.  SpecExec takes the most probable continuations from the draft model to build a "cache" tree for the target model, which then gets validated in a single pass. Using SpecExec, we demonstrate inference of 50B+ parameter LLMs on consumer GPUs with RAM offloading at 4--6 tokens per second with 4-bit quantization or 2--3 tokens per second with 16-bit weights. Our code is available at https://github.com/yandex-research/specexec .107:T45f,Steering vectors (SVs) are a new approach to efficiently adjust language model behaviour at inference time by intervening on intermediate model activations. They have shown promise in terms of improving both capabilities and model alignment. However, the reliability and generalisation properties of this approach are unknown. In this work, we rigorously investigate these properties, and show that steering vectors have substantial limitations both in- and out-of-distribution. In-distribution, steerability is highly variable across different inputs. Depending on the concept, spurious biases can substantially contribute to how effective steering is for each input, presenting a challenge for the widespread use of steering vectors. Out-of-distribution, while steering vectors often generalise well, for several concepts they are brittle to reasonable changes in the prompt, resulting in them failing to generalise well. Overall, our findings show that while steering can work well in the right circumstances, there remain many technical difficulties of applying steering vectors to guide models' behaviour at scale.108:T407,Post-training quantization (PTQ) reduces the memory footprint of LLMs by quantizing weights to low-precision datatypes.
Since LLM inference is usually memory-bound, PTQ methods can improve inference throughput.
Recent state-of-the-art PTQ approaches use vector quantization (VQ) to quantize multiple weights at once, which improves information utilization through better shaping.
However, VQ requires a codebook with size exponential in the dimension.
This limits current VQ-based PTQ works to low VQ dimensions ($\le 8$) that in turn limit quantization quality.
Here, we introduce QTIP, which instead uses trellis coded quantization (TCQ) to achieve ultra-high-dimensional quantization. 
TCQ uses a stateful decoder that separates the codebook size from the bitrate and effective dimension. 
QTIP introduces a spectrum of lookup-only to computed lookup-free trellis codes designed for a hardware-efficient "bitshift" trellis structure; these codes achieve state-of-the-art results in both quantization quality and inference speed.109:T459,Recent work suggests that large language models may implicitly learn world models. How should we assess this possibility? We formalize this question for the case where the underlying reality is governed by a deterministic finite automaton. This includes problems as diverse as simple logical reasoning, geographic navigation, game-playing, and chemistry. We propose new evaluation metrics for world model recovery inspired by the classic Myhill-Nerode theorem from language theory. We illustrate their utility in three domains: game playing, logic puzzles, and navigation. In all domains, the generative models we consider do well on existing diagnostics for assessing world models, but our evaluation metrics reveal their world models to be far less coherent than they appear. Such incoherence creates fragility: using a generative model to solve related but subtly different tasks can lead to failures. Building generative models that meaningfully capture the underlying logic of the domains they model would be immensely valuable; our results suggest new ways to assess how close a given model is to that goal.10a:T5da,Diffusion models have emerged as effective distribution estimators in vision, language, and reinforcement learning, but their use as priors in downstream tasks poses an intractable posterior inference problem. This paper studies *amortized* sampling of the posterior over data, $\mathbf{x}\sim p^{\rm post}(\mathbf{x})\propto p(\mathbf{x})r(\mathbf{x})$, in a model that consists of a diffusion generative model prior $p(\mathbf{x})$ and a black-box constraint or likelihood function $r(\mathbf{x})$. We state and prove the asymptotic correctness of a data-free learning objective, *relative trajectory balance*, for training a diffusion model that samples from this posterior, a problem that existing methods solve only approximately or in restricted cases. Relative trajectory balance arises from the generative flow network perspective on diffusion models, which allows the use of deep reinforcement learning techniques to improve mode coverage. Experiments illustrate the broad potential of unbiased inference of arbitrary posteriors under diffusion priors: in vision (classifier guidance), language (infilling under a discrete diffusion LLM), and multimodal data (text-to-image generation). Beyond generative modeling, we apply relative trajectory balance to the problem of continuous control with a score-based behavior prior, achieving state-of-the-art results on benchmarks in offline reinforcement learning. Code is available at [this link](https://github.com/GFNOrg/diffusion-finetuning).10b:T465,Safety and trustworthiness are indispensable requirements for real-world applications of AI systems using large language models (LLMs). This paper formulates human value alignment as an optimization problem of the language model policy to maximize reward under a safety constraint, and then proposes an algorithm, Stepwise Alignment for Constrained Policy Optimization (SACPO). One key idea behind SACPO, supported by theory, is that the optimal policy incorporating reward and safety can be directly obtained from a reward-aligned policy. Building on this key idea, SACPO aligns LLMs step-wise with each metric while leveraging simple yet powerful alignment algorithms such as direct preference optimization (DPO). SACPO offers several advantages, including simplicity, stability, computational efficiency, and flexibility of algorithms and datasets. Under mild assumptions, our theoretical analysis provides the upper bounds on optimality and safety constraint violation. Our experimental results show that SACPO can fine-tune Alpaca-7B better than the state-of-the-art method in terms of both helpfulness and harmlessness.10c:T41d,Image captioning was recently found to be an effective pretraining method similar to contrastive pretraining. This opens up the largely-unexplored potential of using natural language as a flexible and powerful interface for handling diverse pretraining tasks. In this paper, we demonstrate this with a novel visual pretraining paradigm, LocCa, that incorporates location-aware tasks into captioners to teach models to extract rich information from images. Specifically, LocCa employs two tasks, bounding box prediction and location-dependent captioning, conditioned on the image pixel input. Thanks to the multitask capabilities of an encoder-decoder architecture, we show that an image captioner can effortlessly handle multiple tasks during pretraining. LocCa significantly outperforms standard captioners on downstream localization tasks, achieving state-of-the-art results on RefCOCO/+/g, while maintaining comparable performance on holistic tasks. Our work paves the way for further exploration of natural language interfaces in visual pretraining.10d:T4c1,Most existing theoretical investigations of the accuracy of diffusion models, albeit significant, assume the score function has been approximated to a certain accuracy, and then use this a priori bound to control the error of generation. This article instead provides a first quantitative understanding of the whole generation process, i.e., both training and sampling. More precisely, it conducts a non-asymptotic convergence analysis of denoising score matching under gradient descent. In addition, a refined sampling error analysis for variance exploding models is also provided. The combination of these two results yields a full error analysis, which elucidates (again, but this time theoretically) how to design the training and sampling processes for effective generation. For instance, our theory implies a preference toward noise distribution and loss weighting in training that qualitatively agree with the ones used in [Karras et al., 2022]. It also provides perspectives on the choices of time and variance schedules in sampling: when the score is well trained, the design in [Song et al., 2021] is more preferable, but when it is less trained, the design in [Karras et al., 2022] becomes more preferable.10e:T73b,Data selection has emerged as a core issue for large-scale visual-language model pretaining (e.g., CLIP), particularly with noisy web-curated datasets. Three main data selection approaches are: (1) leveraging external non-CLIP models to aid data selection, (2) training new CLIP-style embedding models that are more effective at selecting high-quality data than the original OpenAI CLIP model, and (3) designing better metrics or strategies universally applicable to any CLIP embedding without requiring specific model properties (e.g., CLIPScore is one popular metric).  While the first two approaches have been extensively studied, the third remains under-explored. In this paper, we advance the third approach by proposing two new methods. Firstly, instead of classical CLIP scores that only consider the alignment between two modalities from a single sample, we introduce $\textbf{negCLIPLoss}$,  a method inspired by CLIP training loss that adds the alignment between one sample and its contrastive pairs as an extra normalization term to CLIPScore for better quality measurement. Secondly, when downstream tasks are known, we propose a new norm-based metric, $\textbf{NormSim}$, to measure the similarity between pretraining data and target data. We test our methods on the data selection benchmark, DataComp [Gadre et al., 2023]. Compared to the best baseline using only OpenAI's CLIP-L/14, our methods achieve a 5.3\% improvement on ImageNet-1k and a 2.8\% improvement on 38 downstream evaluation tasks. Moreover, both $\textbf{negCLIPLoss}$ and $\textbf{NormSim}$ are compatible with existing techniques. By combining our methods with the current best methods DFN [Fang et al., 2023] and HYPE [Kim et al., 2024], we can boost average performance on downstream tasks by 0.9\%, achieving a new state-of-the-art on the DataComp-medium benchmark.10f:T5b4,Despite the widespread use of statistical prior models in various fields, such models for neural network gradients have long been overlooked. The inherent challenge stems from their high-dimensional structures and complex interdependencies, which complicate effective modeling. In this work, we demonstrate the potential of large language models (LLMs) to act as gradient priors in a zero-shot setting. We examine the property by considering lossless gradient compression -- a critical application in distributed learning -- that depends heavily on precise probability modeling. To achieve this, we introduce LM-GC, a novel method that integrates LLMs with arithmetic coding. Our technique converts plain gradients into text-like formats, enhancing token efficiency by up to 38 times compared to their plain representations. We ensure that this data conversion maintains a close alignment with the structure of plain gradients and the symbols commonly recognized by LLMs. Our experiments indicate that LM-GC surpasses existing state-of-the-art lossless compression methods, improving compression rates by 10% up to 17.2% across various datasets and architectures. Additionally, our approach shows promising compatibility with lossy compression techniques such as quantization and sparsification. These findings highlight the significant potential of LLMs as a model for effectively handling gradients. Code is available at https://github.com/hui-po-wang/LM-GC.110:T5a3,The rapid development of Large Language Models (LLMs) has been pivotal in advancing AI, with pre-trained LLMs being adaptable to diverse downstream tasks through fine-tuning. Federated learning (FL) further enhances fine-tuning in a privacy-aware manner by utilizing clients' local data through in-situ computation, eliminating the need for data movement. However, fine-tuning LLMs, given their massive scale of parameters, poses challenges for clients with constrained and heterogeneous resources in FL. Previous methods employed low-rank adaptation (LoRA) for efficient federated fine-tuning but utilized traditional FL aggregation strategies on LoRA adapters. This approach led to mathematically inaccurate aggregation noise, reducing fine-tuning effectiveness and failing to address heterogeneous LoRAs. In this work, we first highlight the mathematical incorrectness of LoRA aggregation in existing federated fine-tuning methods. We introduce a new approach called FLoRA that enables federated fine-tuning on heterogeneous LoRA adapters across clients through a novel stacking-based aggregation method. Our approach is noise-free and seamlessly supports heterogeneous LoRAs. Extensive experiments demonstrate FLoRA's superior performance in both homogeneous and heterogeneous settings, surpassing state-of-the-art methods. We envision this work as a milestone for efficient, privacy-preserving, and accurate federated fine-tuning of LLMs.111:T647,Chart understanding plays a pivotal role when applying Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) to real-world tasks such as analyzing scientific papers or financial reports. However, existing datasets often focus on oversimplified and homogeneous charts with template-based questions, leading to an overly optimistic measure of progress. We demonstrate that although open-source models can appear to outperform strong proprietary models on these benchmarks, a simple stress test with slightly different charts or questions deteriorates performance by up to 34.5%. In this work, we propose CharXiv, a comprehensive evaluation suite involving 2,323 natural, challenging, and diverse charts from scientific papers. CharXiv includes two types of questions: 1) descriptive questions about examining basic chart elements and 2) reasoning questions that require synthesizing information across complex visual elements in the chart. To ensure quality, all charts and questions are handpicked, curated, and verified by human experts. Our results reveal a substantial, previously underestimated gap between the reasoning skills of the strongest proprietary model (i.e., GPT-4o), which achieves 47.1% accuracy, and the strongest open-source model (i.e., InternVL Chat V1.5), which achieves 29.2%. All models lag far behind human performance of 80.5%, underscoring weaknesses in the chart understanding capabilities of existing MLLMs. We hope that CharXiv facilitates future research on MLLM chart understanding by providing a more realistic and faithful measure of progress. Project website: https://charxiv.github.io/112:T711,Fine-tuning large-scale pretrained models is prohibitively expensive in terms of computational and memory costs. LoRA, as one of the most popular Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) methods, offers a cost-effective alternative by fine-tuning an auxiliary low-rank model that has significantly fewer parameters. Although LoRA reduces the computational and memory requirements significantly at each iteration, extensive empirical evidence indicates that it converges at a considerably slower rate compared to full fine-tuning, ultimately leading to increased overall compute and often worse test performance. In our paper, we perform an in-depth investigation of the initialization method of LoRA and show that careful initialization (without any change of the architecture and the training algorithm) can significantly enhance both efficiency and performance. In particular, we introduce a novel initialization method, LoRA-GA (Low Rank Adaptation with Gradient Approximation), which aligns the gradients of low-rank matrix product with those of full fine-tuning at the first step. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that LoRA-GA achieves a convergence rate comparable to that of full fine-tuning (hence being significantly faster than vanilla LoRA as well as various recent improvements) while simultaneously attaining comparable or even better performance. For example, on the subset of the GLUE dataset with T5-Base, LoRA-GA outperforms LoRA by 5.69% on average. On larger models such as Llama 2-7B, LoRA-GA shows performance improvements of 0.34, 11.52%, and 5.05% on MTbench, GSM8k, and Human-eval, respectively. Additionally, we observe up to 2-4 times convergence speed improvement compared to vanilla LoRA, validating its effectiveness in accelerating convergence and enhancing model performance.113:T459,With the rapid advancement of multimodal large language models (MLLMs), their evaluation has become increasingly comprehensive. However, understanding long multimodal content, as a foundational ability for real-world applications, remains underexplored. In this work, we present Needle In A Multimodal Haystack (MM-NIAH), the first benchmark specifically designed to systematically evaluate the capability of existing MLLMs to comprehend long multimodal documents. Our benchmark includes three types of evaluation tasks: multimodal retrieval, counting, and reasoning. In each task, the model is required to answer the questions according to different key information scattered throughout the given multimodal document. Evaluating the leading MLLMs on MM-NIAH, we observe that existing models still have significant room for improvement on these tasks, especially on vision-centric evaluation. We hope this work can provide a platform for further research on long multimodal document comprehension and contribute to the advancement of MLLMs. Code and benchmark are released at https://github.com/OpenGVLab/MM-NIAH.114:T47f,Real-world data deviating from the independent and identically distributed (\textit{i.i.d.}) assumption of in-distribution training data poses security threats to deep networks, thus advancing out-of-distribution (OOD) detection algorithms. Detection methods in generative language models (GLMs) mainly focus on uncertainty estimation and embedding distance measurement, with the latter proven to be most effective in traditional linguistic tasks like summarization and translation. However, another complex generative scenario mathematical reasoning poses significant challenges to embedding-based methods due to its high-density feature of output spaces, but this feature causes larger discrepancies in the embedding shift trajectory between different samples in latent spaces. Hence, we propose a trajectory-based method TV score, which uses trajectory volatility for OOD detection in mathematical reasoning. Experiments show that our method outperforms all traditional algorithms on GLMs under mathematical reasoning scenarios and can be extended to more applications with high-density features in output spaces, such as multiple-choice questions.115:T6c2,Large language models (LLMs) often generate content that contains factual errors when responding to fact-seeking prompts on open-ended topics. To benchmark a model’s long-form factuality in open domains, we first use GPT-4 to generate LongFact, a prompt set comprising thousands of questions spanning 38 topics. We then propose that LLM agents can be used as automated evaluators for long-form factuality through a method which we call Search-Augmented Factuality Evaluator (SAFE). SAFE utilizes an LLM to break down a long-form response into a set of individual facts and to evaluate the accuracy of each fact using a multi-step reasoning process comprising sending search queries to Google Search and determining whether a fact is supported by the search results. Furthermore, we propose extending F1 score as an aggregated metric for long-form factuality. To do so, we balance the percentage of supported facts in a response (precision) with the percentage of provided facts relative to a hyperparameter representing a user’s preferred response length (recall).

Empirically, we demonstrate that LLM agents can outperform crowdsourced human annotators—on a set of∼16k individual facts, SAFE agrees with crowdsourced human annotators 72% of the time, and on a random subset of 100 disagreement cases, SAFE wins 76% of the time. At the same time, SAFE is more than 20 times cheaper than human annotators.  We also benchmark thirteen language models on LongFact across four model families (Gemini, GPT, Claude, and PaLM-2), finding that larger language models generally achieve better long-form factuality. LongFact, SAFE, and all experimental code are available at https://github.com/google-deepmind/long-form-factuality.116:T5c6,Program synthesis with language models (LMs) has unlocked a large set of reasoning abilities; code-tuned LMs have proven adept at generating programs that solve a wide variety of algorithmic symbolic manipulation tasks (e.g. word concatenation). However, not all reasoning tasks are easily expressible as code, e.g. tasks involving commonsense reasoning, moral decision-making, and sarcasm understanding. Our goal is to extend a LM’s program synthesis skills to such tasks and evaluate the results via pseudo-programs, namely Python programs where some leaf function calls are left undefined. To that end, we propose, Code Generation and Emulated EXecution (COGEX). COGEX works by (1) training LMs to generate pseudo-programs and (2) teaching them to emulate their generated program’s execution, including those leaf functions, allowing the LM’s knowledge to fill in the execution gaps; and (3) using them to search over many programs to find an optimal one. To adapt the COGEX model to a new task, we introduce a method for performing program search to find a single program whose pseudo-execution yields optimal performance when applied to all the instances of a given dataset. We show that our approach yields large improvements compared to standard in-context learning approaches on a battery of tasks, both algorithmic and soft reasoning. This result thus demonstrates that code synthesis can be applied to a much broader class of problems than previously considered.117:T600,Large language models (LLMs) have achieved significant success across various domains. However, training these LLMs typically involves substantial memory and computational costs during both forward and backward propagation. While parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) considerably reduces the training memory associated with parameters, it does not address the significant computational costs and activation memory. In this paper, we propose Dropping Backward Propagation (DropBP), a novel approach designed to reduce computational costs and activation memory while maintaining accuracy. DropBP randomly drops layers during backward propagation, which is essentially equivalent to training shallow submodules generated by undropped layers and residual connections. Additionally, DropBP calculates the sensitivity of each layer to assign an appropriate drop rate, thereby stabilizing the training process. DropBP is not only applicable to full fine-tuning but can also be orthogonally integrated with all types of PEFT by dropping layers during backward propagation. Specifically, DropBP can reduce training time by 44% with comparable accuracy to the baseline, accelerate convergence to the same perplexity by 1.5$\times$, and enable training with a sequence length 6.2$\times$ larger on a single NVIDIA-A100 GPU. Furthermore, our DropBP enabled a throughput increase of 79% on a NVIDIA A100 GPU and 117% on an Intel Gaudi2 HPU. The code is available at [https://github.com/WooSunghyeon/dropbp](https://github.com/WooSunghyeon/dropbp).118:T495,Parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT) methods seek to adapt large neural models via updates to a small number of *weights*. However, much prior interpretability work has shown that *representations* encode rich semantic information, suggesting that editing representations might be a more powerful alternative. We pursue this hypothesis by developing a family of **Representation Finetuning (ReFT)** methods. ReFT methods operate on a frozen base model and learn task-specific interventions on hidden representations. We define a strong instance of the ReFT family, Low-rank Linear Subspace ReFT (LoReFT), and we identify an ablation of this method that trades some performance for increased efficiency. Both are drop-in replacements for existing PEFTs and learn interventions that are 15x--65x more parameter-efficient than LoRA. We showcase LoReFT on eight commonsense reasoning tasks, four arithmetic reasoning tasks, instruction-tuning, and GLUE. In all these evaluations, our ReFTs deliver the best balance of efficiency and performance, and almost always outperform state-of-the-art PEFTs. Upon publication, we will publicly release our generic ReFT training library.119:T6ac,A well-known dilemma in large vision-language models (e.g., GPT-4, LLaVA) is that while increasing the number of vision tokens generally enhances visual understanding, it also significantly raises memory and computational costs, especially in long-term, dense video frame streaming scenarios. Although learnable approaches like Q-Former and Perceiver Resampler have been developed to reduce the vision token burden, they overlook the context causally modeled by LLMs (i.e., key-value cache), potentially leading to missed visual cues when addressing user queries. In this paper, we introduce a novel approach to reduce vision compute by leveraging redundant vision tokens ``skipping layers'' rather than decreasing the number of vision tokens. Our method, VideoLLM-MoD, is inspired by mixture-of-depths LLMs and addresses the challenge of numerous vision tokens in long-term or streaming video. Specifically, for certain transformer layer, we learn to skip the computation for a high proportion (e.g., 80\%) of vision tokens, passing them directly to the next layer. This approach significantly enhances model efficiency, achieving approximately 42% time and 30% memory savings for the entire training. Moreover, our method reduces the computation in the context and avoid decreasing the vision tokens, thus preserving or even improving performance compared to the vanilla model. We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of VideoLLM-MoD, showing its state-of-the-art results on multiple benchmarks, including narration, forecasting, and summarization tasks in COIN, Ego4D, and Ego-Exo4D datasets. The code and checkpoints will be made available at github.com/showlab/VideoLLM-online.11a:T5e3,Large language models (LLMs) are vulnerable to adversarial attacks that can bypass their safety guardrails. In many domains, adversarial training has proven to be one of the most promising methods to reliably improve robustness against such attacks. Yet, in the context of LLMs, current methods for adversarial training are hindered by the high computational costs required to perform discrete adversarial attacks at each training iteration. We address this problem by instead calculating adversarial attacks in the continuous embedding space of the LLM, which is orders of magnitudes more efficient. We propose a fast adversarial training algorithm (C-AdvUL) composed of two losses: the first makes the model robust on continuous embedding attacks computed on an adversarial behaviour dataset; the second ensures the usefulness of the final model by fine-tuning on utility data. Moreover, we introduce C-AdvIPO, an adversarial variant of IPO that does not require utility data for adversarially robust alignment. Our empirical evaluation on five models from different families (Gemma, Phi3, Mistral, Zephyr, Llama2) and at different scales (2B, 3.8B, 7B) shows that both algorithms substantially enhance LLM robustness against discrete attacks (GCG, AutoDAN, PAIR), while maintaining utility. Our results demonstrate that robustness to continuous perturbations can extrapolate to discrete threat models. Thereby, we present a path toward scalable adversarial training algorithms for robustly aligning LLMs.11b:T571,Large language models (LLMs) have emerged as a cornerstone in real-world applications with lengthy streaming inputs (e.g., LLM-driven agents). However, existing LLMs, pre-trained on sequences with a restricted maximum length, cannot process longer sequences due to the out-of-domain and distraction issues. Common solutions often involve continual pre-training on longer sequences, which will introduce expensive computational overhead and uncontrollable change in model capabilities. In this paper, we unveil the intrinsic capacity of LLMs for understanding extremely long sequences without any fine-tuning. To this end, we introduce a training-free memory-based method, InfLLM. Specifically, InfLLM stores distant contexts into additional memory units and employs an efficient mechanism to lookup token-relevant units for attention computation. Thereby, InfLLM allows LLMs to efficiently process long sequences with a limited context window and well capture long-distance dependencies. Without any training, InfLLM enables LLMs that are pre-trained on sequences consisting of a few thousand tokens to achieve comparable performance with competitive baselines that continually train these LLMs on long sequences. Even when the sequence length is scaled to $1,024$K, InfLLM still effectively captures long-distance dependencies. Our code can be found in \url{https://github.com/thunlp/InfLLM}.11c:T435,Model quantification uses low bit-width values to represent the weight matrices of existing models to be quantized, which is a promising approach to reduce both storage and computational overheads of deploying highly anticipated LLMs. However, current quantization methods suffer severe performance degradation when the bit-width is extremely reduced, and thus focus on utilizing 4-bit or 8-bit values to quantize models. This paper boldly quantizes the weight matrices of LLMs to 1-bit, paving the way for the extremely low bit-width deployment of LLMs. For this target, we introduce a 1-bit model compressing framework named OneBit, including a novel 1-bit parameter representation method to better quantize LLMs as well as an effective parameter initialization method based on matrix decomposition to improve the convergence speed of the quantization framework. Sufficient experimental results indicate that OneBit achieves good performance (at least 81% of the non-quantized performance on LLaMA models) with robust training processes when only using 1-bit weight matrices.11d:T5fe,Recent work in interpretability shows that large language models (LLMs) can be adapted for new tasks in a learning-free way: it is possible to intervene on LLM representations to elicit desired behaviors for alignment. For instance, adding certain bias vectors to the outputs of certain attention heads is reported to boost the truthfulness of models. In this work, we show that localized fine-tuning serves as an effective alternative to such representation intervention methods. We introduce a framework called Localized Fine-Tuning on LLM Representations (LoFiT), which identifies a subset of attention heads that are most important for learning a specific task, then trains offset vectors to add to the model's hidden representations at those selected heads. LoFiT localizes to a sparse set of heads (3%-10%) and learns the offset vectors from limited training data, comparable to the settings used for representation intervention. For truthfulness and reasoning tasks, we find that LoFiT's intervention vectors are more effective for LLM adaptation than vectors from representation intervention methods such as Inference-time Intervention. We also find that the localization step is important: selecting a task-specific set of attention heads can lead to higher performance than intervening on heads selected for a different task. Finally, across 7 tasks we study, LoFiT achieves comparable performance to other parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods such as LoRA, despite modifying 20x-200x fewer parameters than these methods.11e:T41b,Large language models have demonstrated impressive capabilities across various natural language processing tasks, especially in solving mathematical problems. However, large language models are not good at math theorem proving using formal languages like Lean. A significant challenge in this area is the scarcity of training data available in these formal languages. To address this issue, we propose a novel pipeline that iteratively generates and filters synthetic data to translate natural language mathematical problems into Lean 4 statements, and vice versa. Our results indicate that the synthetic data pipeline can provide useful training data and improve the performance of LLMs in translating and understanding complex mathematical problems and proofs. Our final dataset contains about 57K formal-informal question pairs along with searched proof from the math contest forum and 21 new IMO questions. We open-source our code at https://github.com/InternLM/InternLM-Math and our data at https://huggingface.co/datasets/InternLM/Lean-Workbook.11f:T736,Large language models (LLMs) have shown impressive performance on language tasks but face challenges when deployed on resource-constrained devices due to their extensive parameters and reliance on dense multiplications, resulting in high memory demands and latency bottlenecks. Shift-and-add reparameterization offers a promising solution by replacing costly multiplications with hardware-friendly primitives in both the attention and multi-layer perceptron (MLP) layers of an LLM. However, current reparameterization techniques require training from scratch or full parameter fine-tuning to restore accuracy, which is resource-intensive for LLMs. To address this, we propose accelerating pretrained LLMs through post-training shift-and-add reparameterization, creating efficient multiplication-free models, dubbed ShiftAddLLM. Specifically, we quantize each weight matrix into binary matrices paired with group-wise scaling factors. The associated multiplications are reparameterized into (1) shifts between activations and scaling factors and (2) queries and adds according to the binary matrices. To reduce accuracy loss, we present a multi-objective optimization method to minimize both weight and output activation reparameterization errors. Additionally, based on varying sensitivity across layers to reparameterization, we develop an automated bit allocation strategy to further reduce memory usage and latency. Experiments on five LLM families and eight tasks consistently validate the effectiveness of ShiftAddLLM, achieving average perplexity improvements of 5.6 and 22.7 points at comparable or lower latency compared to the most competitive quantized LLMs at 3 and 2 bits, respectively, and more than 80% memory and energy reductions over the original LLMs. Codes and models are available at https://github.com/GATECH-EIC/ShiftAddLLM.120:T4c7,Sequential decision-making is desired to align with human intents and exhibit versatility across various tasks. Previous methods formulate it as a conditional generation process, utilizing return-conditioned diffusion models to directly model trajectory distributions. Nevertheless, the return-conditioned paradigm relies on pre-defined reward functions, facing challenges when applied in multi-task settings characterized by varying reward functions (versatility) and showing limited controllability concerning human preferences (alignment). In this work, we adopt multi-task preferences as a unified condition for both single- and multi-task decision-making, and propose preference representations aligned with preference labels. The learned representations are used to guide the conditional generation process of diffusion models, and we introduce an auxiliary objective to maximize the mutual information between representations and corresponding generated trajectories, improving alignment between trajectories and preferences. Extensive experiments in D4RL and Meta-World demonstrate that our method presents favorable performance in single- and multi-task scenarios, and exhibits superior alignment with preferences.121:T6f8,Recent advancements in generative models have highlighted the crucial role of image tokenization in the efficient synthesis of high-resolution images. Tokenization, which transforms images into latent representations, reduces computational demands compared to directly processing pixels and enhances the effectiveness and efficiency of the generation process. Prior methods, such as VQGAN, typically utilize 2D latent grids with fixed downsampling factors. However, these 2D tokenizations face challenges in managing the inherent redundancies present in images, where adjacent regions frequently display similarities. To overcome this issue, we introduce Transformer-based 1-Dimensional Tokenizer (TiTok), an innovative approach that tokenizes images into 1D latent sequences. TiTok provides a more compact latent representation, yielding substantially more efficient and effective representations than conventional techniques. For example, a 256 x 256 x 3 image can be reduced to just 32 discrete tokens, a significant reduction from the 256 or 1024 tokens obtained by prior methods. Despite its compact nature, TiTok achieves competitive performance to state-of-the-art approaches. Specifically, using the same generator framework, TiTok attains 1.97 gFID, outperforming MaskGIT baseline significantly by 4.21 at ImageNet 256 x 256 benchmark. The advantages of TiTok become even more significant when it comes to higher resolution. At ImageNet 512 x 512 benchmark, TiTok not only outperforms state-of-the-art diffusion model DiT-XL/2 (gFID 2.74 vs. 3.04), but also reduces the image tokens by 64x, leading to 410x faster generation process. Our best-performing variant can significantly surpasses DiT-XL/2 (gFID 2.13 vs. 3.04) while still generating high-quality samples 74x faster.122:T67f,Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have gained significant attention due to their impressive capabilities in multimodal understanding. However, existing methods rely heavily on extensive modal-specific pretraining and joint-modal tuning, leading to significant computational burdens when expanding to new modalities. In this paper, we propose PathWeave, a flexible and scalable framework with modal-Path sWitching and ExpAnsion abilities that enables MLLMs to continually EVolve on modalities for $\mathbb{X}$-modal reasoning. We leverage the concept of Continual Learning and develop an incremental training strategy atop pre-trained MLLMs, enabling their expansion to new modalities using uni-modal data, without executing joint-modal pretraining. In detail, a novel Adapter-in-Adapter (AnA) framework is introduced, in which uni-modal and cross-modal adapters are seamlessly integrated to facilitate efficient modality alignment and collaboration. Additionally, an MoE-based gating module is applied between two types of adapters to further enhance the multimodal interaction. To investigate the proposed method, we establish a challenging benchmark called Continual Learning of Modality (MCL), which consists of high-quality QA data from five distinct modalities: image, video, audio, depth and point cloud. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed AnA framework on learning plasticity and memory stability during continual learning. Furthermore, PathWeave performs comparably to state-of-the-art MLLMs while concurrently reducing parameter training burdens by 98.73%. Our code locates at https://github.com/JiazuoYu/PathWeave123:T6a6,Multimodal learning has gained increasing importance across various fields, offering the ability to integrate data from diverse sources such as images, text, and personalized records, which are frequently observed in medical domains. However, in scenarios where some modalities are missing, many existing frameworks struggle to accommodate arbitrary modality combinations, often relying heavily on a single modality or complete data. This oversight of potential modality combinations limits their applicability in real-world situations. To address this challenge, we propose Flex-MoE (Flexible Mixture-of-Experts), a new framework designed to flexibly incorporate arbitrary modality combinations while maintaining robustness to missing data. The core idea of Flex-MoE is to first address missing modalities using a new missing modality bank that integrates observed modality combinations with the corresponding missing ones. This is followed by a uniquely designed Sparse MoE framework. Specifically, Flex-MoE first trains experts using samples with all modalities to inject generalized knowledge through the generalized router ($\mathcal{G}$-Router). The $\mathcal{S}$-Router then specializes in handling fewer modality combinations by assigning the top-1 gate to the expert corresponding to the observed modality combination. We evaluate Flex-MoE on the ADNI dataset, which encompasses four modalities in the Alzheimer's Disease domain, as well as on the MIMIC-IV dataset. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of Flex-MoE, highlighting its ability to model arbitrary modality combinations in diverse missing modality scenarios. Code is available at: \url{https://github.com/UNITES-Lab/flex-moe}.124:T585,Large language models (LLMs) have shown increasing capability in problem-solving and decision-making, largely based on the step-by-step chain-of-thought reasoning processes. However, evaluating these reasoning abilities has become increasingly challenging. Existing outcome-based benchmarks are beginning to saturate, becoming less effective in tracking meaningful progress. To address this, we present a process-based benchmark MR-Ben that demands a meta-reasoning skill, where LMs are asked to locate and analyse potential errors in automatically generated reasoning steps. Our meta-reasoning paradigm is especially suited for system-2 slow thinking, mirroring the human cognitive process of carefully examining assumptions, conditions, calculations, and logic to identify mistakes. MR-Ben comprises 5,975 questions curated by human experts across a wide range of subjects, including physics, chemistry, logic, coding, and more. Through our designed metrics for assessing meta-reasoning on this benchmark, we identify interesting limitations and weaknesses of current LLMs (open-source and closed-source models). For example, with models like the o1 series from OpenAI demonstrating strong performance by effectively scrutinizing the solution space, many other state-of-the-art models fall significantly behind on MR-Ben, exposing potential shortcomings in their training strategies and inference methodologies.125:T595,Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown promise in assisting scientific discovery. However, such applications are currently limited by LLMs' deficiencies in understanding intricate scientific concepts, deriving symbolic equations, and solving advanced numerical calculations. To bridge these gaps, we introduce SciInstruct, a suite of scientific instructions for training scientific language models capable of college-level scientific reasoning. Central to our approach is a novel self-reflective instruction annotation framework to address the data scarcity challenge in the science domain. This framework leverages existing LLMs to generate step-by-step reasoning for unlabelled scientific questions, followed by a process of self-reflective critic-and-revise. Applying this framework, we curated a diverse and high-quality dataset encompassing physics, chemistry, math, and formal proofs. We analyze the curated SciInstruct from multiple interesting perspectives (e.g., domain, scale, source, question type, answer length, etc.). To verify the effectiveness of SciInstruct, we fine-tuned different language models with SciInstruct, i.e., ChatGLM3 (6B and 32B), Llama3-8B-Instruct, and Mistral-7B: MetaMath, enhancing their scientific and mathematical reasoning capabilities, without sacrificing the language understanding capabilities of the base model. We release all codes and SciInstruct at https://github.com/THUDM/SciGLM.126:T638,Pretrained language models can encode a large amount of knowledge and utilize it for various reasoning tasks, yet they can still struggle to learn novel factual knowledge effectively from finetuning on limited textual demonstrations. In this work, we show that the reason for this deficiency is that language models are biased to learn word co-occurrence statistics instead of true factual associations. We identify the differences between two forms of knowledge representation in language models: knowledge in the form of co-occurrence statistics is encoded in the middle layers of the transformer model and does not generalize well to reasoning scenarios beyond simple question answering, while true factual associations are encoded in the lower layers and can be freely utilized in various reasoning tasks. Based on these observations, we propose two strategies to improve the learning of factual associations in language models. We show that training on text with implicit rather than explicit factual associations can force the model to learn factual associations instead of co-occurrence statistics, significantly improving the generalization of newly learned knowledge. We also propose a simple training method to actively forget the learned co-occurrence statistics, which unblocks and enhances the learning of factual associations when training on plain narrative text. On both synthetic and real-world corpora, the two proposed strategies improve the generalization of the knowledge learned during finetuning to reasoning scenarios such as indirect and multi-hop question answering.127:T545,Transformers have shown impressive capabilities across various tasks, but their performance on compositional problems remains a topic of debate. In this work, we investigate the mechanisms of how transformers behave on unseen compositional tasks.  We discover that the parameter initialization scale plays a critical role in determining whether the model learns inferential (reasoning-based) solutions, which capture the underlying compositional primitives, or symmetric (memory-based) solutions, which simply memorize mappings without understanding the compositional structure. By analyzing the information flow and vector representations within the model, we reveal the distinct mechanisms underlying these solution types. We further find that inferential (reasoning-based) solutions exhibit low complexity bias, which we hypothesize is a key factor enabling them to learn individual mappings for single anchors. We validate our conclusions on various real-world datasets. Our findings provide valuable insights into the role of initialization scale in tuning the reasoning and memorizing ability and we propose the initialization rate $\gamma$ to be a convenient tunable hyper-parameter in common deep learning frameworks, where $1/d_{\mathrm{in}}^\gamma$ is the standard deviation of parameters of the layer with $d_{\mathrm{in}}$ input neurons.128:T514,In this paper, we present a simple optimization-based preprocessing technique called Weight Magnitude Reduction (MagR) to improve the performance of post-training quantization. For each linear layer, we adjust the pre-trained floating-point weights by solving an $\ell_\infty$-regularized optimization problem. This process greatly diminishes the maximum magnitude of the weights and smooths out outliers, while preserving the layer's output. The preprocessed weights are centered more towards zero, which facilitates the subsequent quantization process. To implement MagR, we address the $\ell_\infty$-regularization by employing an efficient proximal gradient descent algorithm. Unlike existing preprocessing methods that involve linear transformations and subsequent post-processing steps, which can introduce significant overhead at inference time, MagR functions as a non-linear transformation, eliminating the need for any additional post-processing. This ensures that MagR introduces no overhead whatsoever during inference. Our experiments demonstrate that MagR achieves state-of-the-art performance on the Llama family of models. For example, we achieve a Wikitext2 perplexity of 5.95 on the LLaMA2-70B model for per-channel INT2 weight quantization without incurring any inference overhead.129:T5eb,Current multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) suffer from ``hallucination'', occasionally generating responses that are not grounded in the input images. To tackle this challenge, one promising path is to utilize reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), which steers MLLMs towards learning superior responses while avoiding inferior ones. We rethink the common practice of using binary preferences (i.e., superior, inferior), and find that adopting multi-level preferences (e.g., superior, medium, inferior) is better for two benefits: 1) It narrows the gap between adjacent levels, thereby encouraging MLLMs to discern subtle differences. 2) It further integrates cross-level comparisons (beyond adjacent-level comparisons), thus providing a broader range of comparisons with hallucination examples. To verify our viewpoint, we present the Automated Multi-level Preference (AMP) framework for MLLMs. To facilitate this framework, we first develop an automated dataset generation pipeline that provides high-quality multi-level preference datasets without any human annotators. Furthermore, we design the Multi-level Direct Preference Optimization (MDPO) algorithm to robustly conduct complex multi-level preference learning. Additionally, we propose a new hallucination benchmark, MRHal-Bench. Extensive experiments across public hallucination and general benchmarks, as well as our MRHal-Bench, demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method. Code is available at https://github.com/takomc/amp.12a:T70d,With the surging growth of model parameters, foundation models pose unprecedented challenges to traditional computational infrastructures. These large models inherently require substantial accelerator memory to accommodate massive tensors during pre-training, fine-tuning, and even inference stages, making it even more challenging to deploy a model with restricted computational resources. Given this challenge, distribution and offloading the model states are two major solutions. Partitioning the required states to participating workers, and storing them in lower speed media, such as host DRAM and block devices, largely alleviate the accelerator memory pressure. However, the prohibitive costs of tensor communication render it a theoretically plausible yet practically inefficient solution. Previous efforts to improve efficiency include maximizing rematerialization and employing chunk-based tensor management to reduce host-device communication. Despite these efforts, the reported training throughput only achieves 36.54% of model FLOPs utilization (MFUs), still not comparable to full on-device training. In this work, we redesign the data flow of heterogeneous hardware and sharded model training to minimize the excessive communication overhead. Our proposed scheme significantly enhances training and inference throughput of large language models under restrictive computational resources. We confirmed a large leap in effective compute time by looking into the kernel-level runtime behavior of our trials, where the MFUs can achieve up to 51%. Compared to the state-of-the-art approach, our framework robustly achieves remarkable speedups from 3x to 30x in multiple distributed heterogeneous training setups and inference speedups of 1.5x to 2.35x without compromising arithmetic precision.12b:T618,In this work, we present TextHarmony, a unified and versatile multimodal generative model proficient in comprehending and generating visual text. Simultaneously generating images and texts typically results in performance degradation due to the inherent inconsistency between vision and language modalities. To overcome this challenge, existing approaches resort to modality-specific data for supervised fine-tuning, necessitating distinct model instances. We propose Slide-LoRA, which dynamically aggregates modality-specific and modality-agnostic LoRA experts, partially decoupling the multimodal generation space. Slide-LoRA harmonizes the generation of vision and language within a singular model instance, thereby facilitating a more unified generative process. Additionally, we develop a high-quality image caption dataset, DetailedTextCaps-100K, synthesized with a sophisticated closed-source MLLM to enhance visual text generation capabilities further. Comprehensive experiments across various benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach. Empowered by Slide-LoRA, TextHarmony achieves comparable performance to modality-specific fine-tuning results with only a 2% increase in parameters and shows an average improvement of 2.5% in visual text comprehension tasks and 4.0% in visual text generation tasks. Our work delineates the viability of an integrated approach to multimodal generation within the visual text domain, setting a foundation for subsequent inquiries. Code is available at https://github.com/bytedance/TextHarmony.12c:T466,In-context learning (ICL) allows transformer-based language models that are pre-trained on general text to quickly learn a specific task with a few"task demonstrations"without updating their parameters, significantly boosting their flexibility and generality. ICL possesses many distinct characteristics from conventional machine learning, thereby requiring new approaches to interpret this learning paradigm. Taking the viewpoint of recent works showing that transformers learn in context by formulating an internal optimizer, we propose an influence function-based attribution technique, DETAIL, that addresses the specific characteristics of ICL. We empirically verify the effectiveness of our approach for demonstration attribution while being computationally efficient. Leveraging the results, we then show how DETAIL can help improve model performance in real-world scenarios through demonstration reordering and curation. Finally, we experimentally prove the wide applicability of DETAIL by showing our attribution scores obtained on white-box models are transferable to black-box models in improving model performance.12d:T46a,Large Language Models (LLMs) are recognized for their potential to be an important building block toward achieving artificial general intelligence due to their unprecedented capability for solving diverse tasks. Despite these achievements, LLMs often underperform in domain-specific tasks without training on relevant domain data. This phenomenon, which is often attributed to distribution shifts, makes adapting pre-trained LLMs with domain-specific data crucial. However, this adaptation raises significant privacy concerns, especially when the data involved come from sensitive domains. In this work, we extensively investigate the privacy vulnerabilities of adapted (fine-tuned) LLMs and benchmark privacy leakage across a wide range of data modalities, state-of-the-art privacy attack methods, adaptation techniques, and model architectures. We systematically evaluate and pinpoint critical factors related to privacy leakage. With our organized codebase and actionable insights, we aim to provide a standardized auditing tool for practitioners seeking to deploy customized LLM applications with faithful privacy assessments.12e:T579,In the realm of image quantization exemplified by VQGAN, the process encodes images into discrete tokens drawn from a codebook with a predefined size. Recent advancements, particularly with LLAMA 3, reveal that enlarging the codebook significantly enhances model performance. However, VQGAN and its derivatives, such as VQGAN-FC (Factorized Codes) and VQGAN-EMA, continue to grapple with challenges related to expanding the codebook size and enhancing codebook utilization. For instance, VQGAN-FC is restricted to learning a codebook with a maximum size of 16,384, maintaining a typically low utilization rate of less than 12% on ImageNet. In this work, we propose a novel image quantization model named VQGAN-LC (Large Codebook), which extends the codebook size to 100,000, achieving an utilization rate exceeding 99%. Unlike previous methods that optimize each codebook entry, our approach begins with a codebook initialized with 100,000 features extracted by a pre-trained vision encoder. Optimization then focuses on training a projector that aligns the entire codebook with the feature distributions of the encoder in VQGAN-LC. We demonstrate the superior performance of our model over its counterparts across a variety of tasks, including image reconstruction, image classification, auto-regressive image generation using GPT, and image creation with diffusion- and flow-based generative models.12f:T535,AI systems can take harmful actions and are highly vulnerable to adversarial attacks. We present an approach, inspired by recent advances in representation engineering, that interrupts the models as they respond with harmful outputs with"circuit breakers."Existing techniques aimed at improving alignment, such as refusal training, are often bypassed. Techniques such as adversarial training try to plug these holes by countering specific attacks. As an alternative to refusal training and adversarial training, circuit-breaking directly controls the representations that are responsible for harmful outputs in the first place. Our technique can be applied to both text-only and multimodal language models to prevent the generation of harmful outputs without sacrificing utility -- even in the presence of powerful unseen attacks. Notably, while adversarial robustness in standalone image recognition remains an open challenge, circuit breakers allow the larger multimodal system to reliably withstand image"hijacks"that aim to produce harmful content. Finally, we extend our approach to AI agents, demonstrating considerable reductions in the rate of harmful actions when they are under attack. Our approach represents a significant step forward in the development of reliable safeguards to harmful behavior and adversarial attacks.130:T5e8,Modern neural networks are often massively overparameterized leading to high compute costs during training and at inference. One effective method to improve both the compute and energy efficiency of neural networks while maintaining good performance is structured pruning, where full network structures (e.g.~neurons or convolutional filters) that have limited impact on the model output are removed. In this work, we propose Bayesian Model Reduction for Structured pruning (BMRS), a fully end-to-end Bayesian method of structured pruning. BMRS is based on two recent methods: Bayesian structured pruning with multiplicative noise, and Bayesian model reduction (BMR), a method which allows efficient comparison of Bayesian models under a change in prior. We present two realizations of BMRS derived from different priors which yield different structured pruning characteristics: 1) BMRS_N with the truncated log-normal prior, which offers reliable compression rates and accuracy without the need for tuning any thresholds and 2) BMRS_U with the truncated log-uniform prior that can achieve more aggressive compression based on the boundaries of truncation. Overall, we find that BMRS offers a theoretically grounded approach to structured pruning of neural networks yielding both high compression rates and accuracy. Experiments on multiple datasets and neural networks of varying complexity showed that the two BMRS methods offer a competitive performance-efficiency trade-off compared to other pruning methods.131:T4c9,Large-scale foundation models have demonstrated exceptional performance in language and vision tasks. However, the numerous dense matrix-vector operations involved in these large networks pose significant computational challenges during inference. To address these challenges, we introduce the Block-Level Adaptive STructured (BLAST) matrix, designed to learn and leverage efficient structures prevalent in the weight matrices of linear layers within deep learning models. Compared to existing structured matrices, the BLAST matrix offers substantial flexibility, as it can represent various types of structures that are either learned from data or computed from pre-existing weight matrices. We demonstrate the efficiency of using the BLAST matrix for compressing both language and vision tasks, showing that (i) for medium-sized models such as ViT and GPT-2, training with BLAST weights boosts performance while reducing complexity by 70% and 40%, respectively; and (ii) for large foundation models such as Llama-7B and DiT-XL, the BLAST matrix achieves a 2x compression while exhibiting the lowest performance degradation among all tested structured matrices. Our code is available at https://github.com/changwoolee/BLAST.132:T41a,Among the most important properties of algorithms investigated in computer science are soundness, completeness, and complexity. These properties, however, are rarely analyzed for the vast collection of recently proposed methods for planning with large language models. In this work, we alleviate this gap. We analyse these properties of using LLMs for planning and highlight that recent trends abandon both soundness and completeness for the sake of inefficiency. We propose a significantly more efficient approach that can, at the same time, maintain both soundness and completeness. We exemplify on four representative search problems, comparing to the LLM-based solutions from the literature that attempt to solve these problems. We show that by using LLMs to produce the code for the search components we can solve the entire datasets with 100\% accuracy with only a few calls to the LLM. We argue for a responsible use of compute resources; urging research community to investigate sound and complete LLM-based approaches that uphold efficiency.133:T72f,Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) has emerged as a promising solution to mitigate the limitations of large language models (LLMs), such as hallucinations and outdated information. However, it remains unclear how LLMs handle knowledge conflicts arising from different augmented retrieved passages, especially when these passages originate from the same source and have equal trustworthiness. In this work, we conduct a comprehensive evaluation of LLM-generated answers to questions that have varying answers based on contradictory passages from Wikipedia, a dataset widely regarded as a high-quality pre-training resource for most LLMs. Specifically, we introduce WikiContradict, a benchmark consisting of 253 high-quality, human-annotated instances designed to assess LLM performance when augmented with retrieved passages containing real-world knowledge conflicts. We benchmark a diverse range of both closed and open-source LLMs under different QA scenarios, including RAG with a single passage, and RAG with 2 contradictory passages. Through rigorous human evaluations on a subset of WikiContradict instances involving 5 LLMs and over 3,500 judgements, we shed light on the behaviour and limitations of these models. For instance, when provided with two passages containing contradictory facts, all models struggle to generate answers that accurately reflect the conflicting nature of the context, especially for implicit conflicts requiring reasoning. Since human evaluation is costly, we also introduce an automated model that estimates LLM performance using a strong open-source language model, achieving an F-score of 0.8. Using this automated metric, we evaluate more than 1,500 answers from seven LLMs across all WikiContradict instances. To facilitate future work, we release WikiContradict on: https://ibm.biz/wikicontradict.134:T6b3,Motion time series collected from mobile and wearable devices such as smartphones and smartwatches offer significant insights into human behavioral patterns, with wide applications in healthcare, automation, IoT, and AR/XR due to their low-power, always-on nature. However, given security and privacy concerns, building large-scale motion time series datasets remains difficult, preventing the development of pre-trained models for human activity analysis. Typically, existing models are trained and tested on the same dataset, leading to poor generalizability across variations in device location, device mounting orientation and human activity type. In this paper, we introduce UniMTS, the first unified pre-training procedure for motion time series that generalizes across diverse device latent factors and activities. Specifically, we employ a contrastive learning framework that aligns motion time series with text descriptions enriched by large language models. This helps the model learn the semantics of time series to generalize across activities. Given the absence of large-scale motion time series data, we derive and synthesize time series from existing motion skeleton data with all-joint coverage. Spatio-temporal graph networks are utilized to capture the relationships across joints for generalization across different device locations. We further design rotation-invariant augmentation to make the model agnostic to changes in device mounting orientations. Our model shows exceptional generalizability across 18 motion time series classification benchmark datasets, outperforming the best baselines by 340% in the zero-shot setting, 16.3% in the few-shot setting, and 9.2% in the full-shot setting.135:T664,While fine-tuning pretrained models has become common practice, these models often underperform outside their specific domains. Recently developed model merging techniques enable the direct integration of multiple models, each fine-tuned for distinct tasks, into a single model. This strategy promotes multitasking capabilities without requiring retraining on the original datasets. However, existing methods fall short in addressing potential conflicts and complex correlations between tasks, especially in parameter-level adjustments, posing a challenge in effectively balancing parameter competition across various tasks. This paper introduces an innovative technique named PCB-Merging (Parameter Competition Balancing), a lightweight and training-free technique that adjusts the coefficients of each parameter for effective model merging. PCB-Merging employs intra-balancing to gauge parameter significance within individual tasks and inter-balancing to assess parameter similarities across different tasks. Parameters with low importance scores are dropped, and the remaining ones are rescaled to form the final merged model. We assessed our approach in diverse merging scenarios, including cross-task, cross-domain, and cross-training configurations, as well as out-of-domain generalization. The experimental results reveal that our approach achieves substantial performance enhancements across multiple modalities, domains, model sizes, number of tasks, fine-tuning forms, and large language models, outperforming existing model merging methods. The code is publicly available at: \url{https://github.com/duguodong7/pcb-merging}.136:T50c,Watermarking is a technique that involves embedding nearly unnoticeable statistical signals within generated content to help trace its source. This work focuses on a scenario where an untrusted third-party user sends prompts to a trusted language model (LLM) provider, who then generates a text from their LLM with a watermark. This setup makes it possible for a detector to later identify the source of the text if the user publishes it. The user can modify the generated text by substitutions, insertions, or deletions. Our objective is to develop a statistical method to detect if a published text is LLM-generated from the perspective of a detector. We further propose a methodology to segment the published text into watermarked and non-watermarked sub-strings. The proposed approach is built upon randomization tests and change point detection techniques. We demonstrate that our method ensures Type I and Type II error control and can accurately identify watermarked sub-strings by finding the corresponding change point locations. To validate our technique, we apply it to texts generated by several language models with prompts extracted from Google's C4 dataset and obtain encouraging numerical results. We release all code publicly at https://github.com/doccstat/llm-watermark-cpd.137:T4f8,Langevin Dynamics is a Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE) central to sampling and generative modeling and is implemented via time discretization. Langevin Monte Carlo (LMC), based on the Euler-Maruyama discretization, is the simplest and most studied algorithm. LMC can suffer from slow convergence - requiring a large number of steps of small step-size to obtain good quality samples. This becomes stark in the case of diffusion models where a large number of steps gives the best samples, but the quality degrades rapidly with smaller number of steps. Randomized Midpoint Method has been recently proposed as a better discretization of Langevin dynamics for sampling from strongly log-concave distributions. However, important applications such as diffusion models involve non-log concave densities and contain time varying drift. We propose its variant, the Poisson Midpoint Method, which approximates a small step-size LMC with large step-sizes. We prove that this can obtain a quadratic speed up of LMC under very weak assumptions. We apply our method to diffusion models for image generation and show that it maintains the quality of DDPM with 1000 neural network calls with just 50-80 neural network calls and outperforms ODE based methods with similar compute.138:T603,Large Language Models (LLMs) are trained on vast amounts of data, most of which is automatically scraped from the internet. This data includes encyclopedic documents that harbor a vast amount of general knowledge (e.g., Wikipedia) but also potentially overlap with benchmark datasets used for evaluating LLMs. Consequently, evaluating models on test splits that might have leaked into the training set is prone to misleading conclusions. To foster sound evaluation of language models, we introduce a new test dataset named RepLiQA, suited for question-answering and topic retrieval tasks. RepLiQA is a collection of five splits of test sets, four of which have not been released to the internet or exposed to LLM APIs prior to this publication. Each sample in RepLiQA comprises (1) a reference document crafted by a human annotator and depicting an imaginary scenario (e.g., a news article) absent from the internet; (2) a question about the document's topic; (3) a ground-truth answer derived directly from the information in the document; and (4) the paragraph extracted from the reference document containing the answer. As such, accurate answers can only be generated if a model can find relevant content within the provided document. We run a large-scale benchmark comprising several state-of-the-art LLMs to uncover differences in performance across models of various types and sizes in a context-conditional language modeling setting. Released splits of RepLiQA can be found here: https://huggingface.co/datasets/ServiceNow/repliqa.139:T598,This paper introduces xRAG, an innovative context compression method tailored for retrieval-augmented generation. xRAG reinterprets document embeddings in dense retrieval--traditionally used solely for retrieval--as features from the retrieval modality. By employing a modality fusion methodology, xRAG seamlessly integrates these embeddings into the language model representation space, effectively eliminating the need for their textual counterparts and achieving an extreme compression rate. 
In xRAG, the only trainable component is the modality bridge, while both the retriever and the language model remain frozen. This design choice allows for the reuse of offline-constructed document embeddings and preserves the plug-and-play nature of retrieval augmentation. 
Experimental results demonstrate that xRAG achieves an average improvement of over 10% across six knowledge-intensive tasks, adaptable to various language model backbones, ranging from a dense 7B model to an 8x7B Mixture of Experts configuration. xRAG not only significantly outperforms previous context compression methods but also matches the performance of uncompressed models on several datasets, while reducing overall FLOPs by a factor of 3.53. Our work pioneers new directions in retrieval-augmented generation from the perspective of multimodality fusion, and we hope it lays the foundation for future efficient and scalable retrieval-augmented systems.13a:T4f1,This paper investigates score-based diffusion models when the underlying target distribution is concentrated on or near low-dimensional manifolds within the higher-dimensional space in which they formally reside, a common characteristic of natural image distributions. Despite previous efforts to understand the data generation process of diffusion models, existing theoretical support remains highly suboptimal in the presence of low-dimensional structure, which we strengthen in this paper. For the popular Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM), we find that the dependency of the error incurred within each denoising step on the ambient dimension $d$ is in general unavoidable. We further identify a unique design of coefficients that yields a converges rate at the order of $O(k^{2}/\sqrt{T})$ (up to log factors), where $k$ is the intrinsic dimension of the target distribution and $T$ is the number of steps. This represents the first theoretical demonstration that the DDPM sampler can adapt to unknown low-dimensional structures in the target distribution, highlighting the critical importance of coefficient design. All of this is achieved by a novel set of analysis tools that characterize the algorithmic dynamics in a more deterministic manner.13b:T532,In this work, we observe that model trained on vast general images via masking strategy, has been naturally embedded with their distribution knowledge, thus spontaneously attains the underlying potential for strong image denoising. Based on this observation, we propose a novel zero-shot denoising paradigm, i.e., Masked Pre-train then Iterative fill (MPI). MPI first trains model via masking and then employs pre-trained weight for high-quality zero-shot image denoising on a single noisy image. Concretely, MPI comprises two key procedures: 1) Masked Pre-training involves training model to reconstruct massive natural images with random masking for generalizable representations, gathering the potential for valid zero-shot denoising on images with varying noise degradation and even in distinct image types. 2) Iterative filling exploits pre-trained knowledge for effective zero-shot denoising. It iteratively optimizes the image by leveraging pre-trained weights, focusing on alternate reconstruction of different image parts, and gradually assembles fully denoised image within limited number of iterations. Comprehensive experiments across various noisy scenarios underscore the notable advances of MPI over previous approaches with a marked reduction in inference time. Code available at https://github.com/krennic999/MPI.13c:T71b,We present the ShareGPT4Video series, aiming to facilitate the video understanding of large video-language models (LVLMs) and the video generation of text-to-video models (T2VMs) via dense and precise captions. The series comprises: 1) ShareGPT4Video, 40K GPT4V annotated dense captions of videos with various lengths and sources, developed through carefully designed data filtering and annotating strategy. 2) ShareCaptioner-Video, an efficient and capable captioning model for arbitrary videos, with 4.8M high-quality aesthetic videos annotated by it. 3) ShareGPT4Video-8B, a simple yet superb LVLM that reached SOTA performance on three advancing video benchmarks. To achieve this, taking aside the non-scalable costly human annotators, we find using GPT4V to caption video with a naive multi-frame or frame-concatenation input strategy leads to less detailed and sometimes temporal-confused results. We argue the challenge of designing a high-quality video captioning strategy lies in three aspects: 1) Inter-frame precise temporal change understanding. 2) Intra-frame detailed content description. 3) Frame-number scalability for arbitrary-length videos. To this end, we meticulously designed a differential video captioning strategy, which is stable, scalable, and efficient for generating captions for videos with arbitrary resolution, aspect ratios, and length. Based on it, we construct ShareGPT4Video, which contains 40K high-quality videos spanning a wide range of categories, and the resulting captions encompass rich world knowledge, object attributes, camera movements, and crucially, detailed and precise temporal descriptions of events. Based on ShareGPT4Video, we further develop ShareCaptioner-Video, a superior captioner capable of efficiently generating high-quality captions for arbitrary videos...13d:T5e7,Large vision-language models (LVLMs) have recently achieved rapid progress, exhibiting great perception and reasoning abilities concerning visual information. However, when faced with prompts in different sizes of solution spaces, LVLMs fail to always give consistent answers regarding the same knowledge point. This inconsistency of answers between different solution spaces is prevalent in LVLMs and erodes trust. To this end, we provide a multi-modal benchmark ConBench, to intuitively analyze how LVLMs perform when the solution space of a prompt revolves around a knowledge point. Based on the ConBench tool, we are the first to reveal the tapestry and get the following findings: (1) In the discriminate realm, the larger the solution space of the prompt, the lower the accuracy of the answers. (2) Establish the relationship between the discriminative and generative realms: the accuracy of the discriminative question type exhibits a strong positive correlation with its Consistency with the caption. (3) Compared to open-source models, closed-source models exhibit a pronounced bias advantage in terms of Consistency. Eventually, we ameliorate the consistency of LVLMs by trigger-based diagnostic refinement, indirectly improving the performance of their caption. We hope this paper will accelerate the research community in better evaluating their models and encourage future advancements in the consistency domain. The project is available at https://github.com/foundation-multimodal-models/ConBench.13e:T706,Large language models (LLMs) need knowledge updates to meet the ever-growing world facts and correct the hallucinated responses, facilitating the methods of lifelong model editing. Where the updated knowledge resides in memories is a fundamental question for model editing. In this paper, we find that editing either long-term memory (direct model parameters) or working memory (non-parametric knowledge of neural network activations/representations by retrieval) will result in an impossible triangle -- reliability, generalization, and locality can not be realized together in the lifelong editing settings. For long-term memory, directly editing the parameters will cause conflicts with irrelevant pretrained knowledge or previous edits (poor reliability and locality). For working memory, retrieval-based activations can hardly make the model understand the edits and generalize (poor generalization). Therefore, we propose WISE to bridge the gap between memories. In WISE, we design a dual parametric memory scheme, which consists of the main memory for the pretrained knowledge and a side memory for the edited knowledge. We only edit the knowledge in the side memory and train a router to decide which memory to go through when given a query. For continual editing, we devise a knowledge-sharding mechanism where different sets of edits reside in distinct subspaces of parameters, and are subsequently merged into a shared memory without conflicts. Extensive experiments show that WISE can outperform previous model editing methods and overcome the impossible triangle under lifelong model editing of question answering, hallucination, and out-of-distribution settings across trending LLM architectures, e.g., GPT, LLaMA, and Mistral. Code is available at https://github.com/zjunlp/EasyEdit.13f:T567,We explore uncertainty quantification in large language models (LLMs), with the goal to identify when uncertainty in responses given a query is large. We simultaneously consider both epistemic and aleatoric uncertainties, where the former comes from the lack of knowledge about the ground truth (such as about facts or the language), and the latter comes from irreducible randomness (such as multiple possible answers). In particular, we derive an information-theoretic metric that allows to reliably detect when only epistemic uncertainty is large, in which case the output of the model is unreliable. This condition can be computed based solely on the output of the model obtained simply by some special iterative prompting based on the previous responses. Such quantification, for instance, allows to detect hallucinations (cases when epistemic uncertainty is high) in both single- and multi-answer responses. This is in contrast to many standard uncertainty quantification strategies (such as thresholding the log-likelihood of a response) where hallucinations in the multi-answer case cannot be detected. We conduct a series of experiments which demonstrate the advantage of our formulation. Further, our investigations shed some light on how the probabilities assigned to a given output by an LLM can be amplified by iterative prompting, which might be of independent interest.140:T764,Colloquially speaking, image generation models based upon diffusion processes are frequently said to exhibit ''hallucinations'' samples that could never occur in the training data.  But where do such hallucinations come from? In this paper, we study a particular failure mode in diffusion models, which we term ***mode interpolation***.  Specifically, we find that diffusion models smoothly ``interpolate'' between nearby data modes in the training set, to generate samples that are completely outside the support of the original training distribution; this phenomenon leads diffusion models to generate artifacts that never existed in real data (i.e., hallucinations). We systematically study the reasons for, and the manifestation of this phenomenon. Through experiments on 1D and 2D Gaussians, we show how a discontinuous loss landscape in the diffusion model's decoder leads to a region where any smooth approximation will cause such hallucinations. Through experiments on artificial datasets with various shapes, we show how hallucination leads to the generation of combinations of shapes that never existed. We extend the validity of mode interpolation in real-world datasets by explaining the unexpected generation of images with additional or missing fingers similar to those produced by popular text-to-image generative models. Finally, we show that diffusion models in fact ***know*** when they go out of support and hallucinate. This is captured by the high variance in the trajectory of the generated sample towards the final few backward sampling process. Using a simple metric to capture this variance, we can remove over 95\% of hallucinations at generation time. We conclude our exploration by showing the implications of such hallucination (and its removal) on the collapse (and stabilization) of recursive training on synthetic data with experiments on datasets like MNIST .141:T6a8,Significant research efforts have been made to scale and improve vision-language model (VLM) training approaches. 
Yet, with an ever-growing number of benchmarks,
researchers are tasked with the heavy burden of implementing each protocol, bearing a non-trivial computational cost, and making sense of how all these benchmarks translate into meaningful axes of progress.
To facilitate a systematic evaluation of VLM progress, we introduce UniBench: a unified implementation of 50+ VLM benchmarks spanning a range of carefully categorized vision-centric capabilities from object recognition to spatial awareness, counting, and much more. We showcase the utility of UniBench for measuring progress by evaluating nearly 60 publicly available vision-language models, trained on scales of up to 12.8B samples. We find that while scaling training data or model size can boost many vision-language model capabilities, scaling offers little benefit for reasoning or relations.  Surprisingly, we also discover today's best VLMs struggle on simple digit recognition and counting tasks, e.g. MNIST, which much simpler networks can solve. Where scale falls short, we find that more precise interventions, such as data quality or tailored-learning objectives offer more promise. For practitioners, we also offer guidance on selecting a suitable VLM for a given application. Finally, we release an easy-to-run UniBench code-base with the full set of 50+ benchmarks and comparisons across 59 models as well as a distilled, representative set of benchmarks that runs in 5 minutes on a single GPU. UniBench with model evaluations on all benchmarks are provided as a toolbox at: https://github.com/facebookresearch/unibench142:T55a,World models constitute a promising approach for training reinforcement learning agents in a safe and sample-efficient manner. Recent world models predominantly operate on sequences of discrete latent variables to model environment dynamics. However, this compression into a compact discrete representation may ignore visual details that are important for reinforcement learning. Concurrently, diffusion models have become a dominant approach for image generation, challenging well-established methods modeling discrete latents. Motivated by this paradigm shift, we introduce DIAMOND (DIffusion As a Model Of eNvironment Dreams), a reinforcement learning agent trained in a diffusion world model. We analyze the key design choices that are required to make diffusion suitable for world modeling, and demonstrate how improved visual details can lead to improved agent performance. DIAMOND achieves a mean human normalized score of 1.46 on the competitive Atari 100k benchmark; a new best for agents trained entirely within a world model. We further demonstrate that DIAMOND's diffusion world model can stand alone as an interactive neural game engine by training on static *Counter-Strike: Global Offensive* gameplay. To foster future research on diffusion for world modeling, we release our code, agents, videos and playable world models at https://diamond-wm.github.io.143:T4c6,Conventional diffusion models typically relies on a fixed forward process, which implicitly defines complex marginal distributions over latent variables. This can often complicate the reverse process’ task in learning generative trajectories, and results in costly inference for diffusion models. To address these limitations, we introduce Neural Flow Diffusion Models (NFDM), a novel framework that enhances diffusion models by supporting a broader range of forward processes beyond the standard Gaussian. We also propose a novel parameterization technique for learning the forward process. Our framework provides an end-to-end, simulation-free optimization objective, effectively minimizing a variational upper bound on the negative log-likelihood. Experimental results demonstrate NFDM’s strong performance, evidenced by state-of-the-art likelihood estimation. Furthermore, we investigate NFDM’s capacity for learning generative dynamics with specific characteristics, such as deterministic straight lines trajectories, and demonstrate how the framework may be adopted for learning bridges between two distributions. The results underscores NFDM’s versatility and its potential for a wide range of applications.144:T4b9,In this paper, we present the LingOly benchmark, a novel benchmark for advanced reasoning abilities in large language models. Using challenging Linguistic Olympiad puzzles, we evaluate (i) capabilities for in-context identification and generalisation of linguistic patterns in very low-resource or extinct languages, and (ii) abilities to follow complex task instructions. The LingOly benchmark covers more than 90 mostly low-resource languages, minimising issues of data contamination, and contains 1,133 problems across 6 formats and 5 levels of human difficulty. We assess performance with both direct accuracy and comparison to a no-context baseline to penalise memorisation. Scores from 11 state-of-the-art LLMs demonstrate the benchmark to be challenging, and models perform poorly on the higher difficulty problems. On harder problems, even the top model only achieved 38.7% accuracy, a 24.7% improvement over the no-context baseline. Large closed models typically outperform open models, and in general, the higher resource the language, the better the scores. These results indicate, in absence of memorisation, true multi-step out-of-domain reasoning remains a challenge for current language models.145:T7d1,Modeling multivariate time series is a well-established problem with a wide range of applications from healthcare to financial markets. It, however, is challenging as it requires methods to (1) have high expressive power of representing complicated dependencies along the time axis to capture both long-term progression and seasonal patterns, (2) capture the inter-variate dependencies when it is informative, (3) dynamically model the dependencies of variate and time dimensions, and (4) have efficient training and inference for very long sequences. Traditional State Space Models (SSMs) are classical approaches for univariate time series modeling due to their simplicity and expressive power to represent linear dependencies. They, however, have fundamentally limited expressive power to capture non-linear dependencies, are slow in practice, and fail to model the inter-variate information flow. Despite recent attempts to improve the expressive power of SSMs by using deep structured SSMs, the existing methods are either limited to univariate time series, fail to model complex patterns (e.g., seasonal patterns), fail to dynamically model the dependencies of variate and time dimensions, and/or are input-independent.  We present Chimera, an expressive variation of the 2-dimensional SSMs with careful design of parameters to maintain high expressive power while keeping the training complexity linear. Using two SSM heads with different discretization processes and input-dependent parameters, Chimera is provably able to learn long-term progression, seasonal patterns, and desirable dynamic autoregressive processes. To improve the efficiency of complex 2D recurrence, we present a fast training using a new 2-dimensional parallel selective scan. Our experimental evaluation shows the superior performance of Chimera on extensive and diverse benchmarks, including ECG and speech time series classification, long-term and short-term time series forecasting, and time series anomaly detection.146:T533,Creating high-quality scientific figures can be time-consuming and challenging, even though sketching ideas on paper is relatively easy. Furthermore, recreating existing figures that are not stored in formats preserving semantic information is equally complex. To tackle this problem, we introduce DeTikZify, a novel multimodal language model that automatically synthesizes scientific figures as semantics-preserving TikZ graphics programs based on sketches and existing figures. To achieve this, we create three new datasets: DaTikZv2, the largest TikZ dataset to date, containing over 360k human-created TikZ graphics; SketchFig, a dataset that pairs hand-drawn sketches with their corresponding scientific figures; and MetaFig, a collection of diverse scientific figures and associated metadata. We train DeTikZify on MetaFig and DaTikZv2, along with synthetically generated sketches learned from SketchFig. We also introduce an MCTS-based inference algorithm that enables DeTikZify to iteratively refine its outputs without the need for additional training. Through both automatic and human evaluation, we demonstrate that DeTikZify outperforms commercial Claude 3 and GPT-4V in synthesizing TikZ programs, with the MCTS algorithm effectively boosting its performance. We make our code, models, and datasets publicly available.147:T5f6,Formal language theory has recently been successfully employed to unravel 
    the power of transformer encoders. This setting is primarily applicable in
    Natural Language Processing (NLP), as a token embedding function (where
    a bounded number of tokens is admitted) is first applied before feeding 
    the input to the transformer. 
    On certain kinds of data (e.g. time 
    series), we want our transformers to be able to handle arbitrary
    input sequences of numbers (or tuples thereof) without a priori
    limiting the values of these numbers. In this
    paper, we initiate the study of the expressive power of transformer encoders
    on sequences of data (i.e. tuples of numbers).
    Our results indicate an increase in expressive power of 
    hard attention transformers over data sequences, in stark contrast to the 
    case of strings.
    In particular, we prove that Unique Hard Attention Transformers (UHAT) over 
    inputs as data sequences no longer lie within the circuit complexity 
    class AC0 (even without positional encodings), unlike the case of string
    inputs, 
    but are still within the complexity class TC0 (even with positional
    encodings). Over strings, UHAT without positional encodings capture only
    regular languages. In contrast, we show that over data sequences
    UHAT can capture non-regular properties.
    Finally, we show that UHAT capture languages 
    definable in an extension of linear temporal logic with unary numeric
    predicates and arithmetics.148:T4b2,We introduce a novel class of generative models based on piecewise deterministic Markov processes (PDMPs), a family of non-diffusive stochastic processes consisting of deterministic motion and random jumps at random times. Similarly to diffusions, such Markov processes admit time reversals that turn out to be PDMPs as well. We apply this observation to three PDMPs considered in the literature: the Zig-Zag process, Bouncy Particle Sampler, and Randomised Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. For these three particular instances, we show that the jump rates and kernels of the corresponding time reversals admit explicit expressions depending on some conditional densities of the PDMP under consideration before and after a jump. Based on these results, we propose efficient training procedures to learn these characteristics and consider methods to approximately simulate the reverse process. Finally, we provide bounds in the total variation distance between the data distribution and the resulting distribution of our model in the case where the base distribution is the standard $d$-dimensional Gaussian distribution. Promising numerical simulations support further investigations into this class of models.149:T666,Over the past decade, studies of naturalistic language processing where participants are scanned while listening to continuous text have flourished. Using word embeddings at first, then large language models, researchers have created encoding models to analyze the brain signals. Presenting these models with the same text as the participants allows to identify brain areas where there is a significant correlation between the functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) time series and the ones predicted by the models' artificial neurons. One intriguing finding from these studies is that they have revealed highly symmetric bilateral activation patterns, somewhat at odds with the well-known left lateralization of language processing. Here, we report analyses of an fMRI dataset where we manipulate the complexity of large language models, testing 28 pretrained models from 8 different families, ranging from 124M to 14.2B parameters. First, we observe that the performance of models in predicting brain responses follows a scaling law, where the fit with brain activity increases linearly with the logarithm of the number of parameters of the model (and its performance on natural language processing tasks). Second, although this effect is present in both hemispheres, it is stronger in the left than in the right hemisphere. Specifically, the left-right difference in brain correlation follows a scaling law with the number of parameters. This finding reconciles computational analyses of brain activity using large language models with the classic observation from aphasic patients showing left hemisphere dominance for language.14a:T539,Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) provides a principled framework for aligning AI systems with human preference data. For various reasons, e.g., personal bias, context ambiguity, lack of training, etc, human annotators may give incorrect or inconsistent preference labels.  To tackle this challenge, we propose a robust RLHF approach -- $R^3M$, which models the potentially corrupted preference label as sparse outliers. Accordingly, we formulate the robust reward learning as an $\ell_1$-regularized maximum likelihood estimation problem. Computationally, we develop an efficient alternating optimization algorithm, which only incurs negligible computational overhead compared with the standard RLHF approach. Theoretically, we prove that under proper regularity conditions, $R^3M$ can consistently learn the underlying reward and identify outliers, provided that the number of outlier labels scales sublinearly with the preference sample size. Furthermore, we remark that $R^3M$ is versatile and can be extended to various preference optimization methods, including direct preference optimization (DPO). Our experiments on robotic control and natural language generation with large language models (LLMs) show that $R^3M$ improves robustness of the reward  against several types of perturbations to the preference data.14b:T63e,Current post-training quantization methods for LLMs compress the weights down to 4-bits, with moderate to low degradation in accuracy. However, further reducing the number of bits or accelerating the network while avoiding large accuracy drops, especially for smaller, sub 7B models, remains an actively researched and open problem. To address this, in this work, we introduce Quantization with Binary Bases (QBB), a new approach for low-bit quantization that effectively removes (nearly) all multiplications, reducing the implementation to summations. Our novel approach works by decomposing the original weights into a set of binary (1-bit) matrices using an iterative process. For a given layer, starting from a weight matrix, we first construct an initial approximation using an analytical solution, where each new binary matrix, paired with a scaling vector, approximates the residual error of the previous estimation. Secondly, using gradient descent and a progressive learning curriculum, we find the optimal set of binary matrices and scaling vectors that minimize the $\ell_2$ distance between the produced approximation and original weights. Thirdly, as previous steps are input agnostic, we holistically optimize the scaling vectors alone, calibrating them in student-teacher fashion, with the teacher providing both the data, 
 by autoregressive generation starting from a random token, and the target logits.
 When evaluated across multiple LLM families, our approach matches and outperforms all prior works, setting a new state-of-the-art result using a summation-only based approach.14c:T528,Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionised natural language processing, exhibiting impressive human-like capabilities. In particular, LLMs are capable of"lying", knowingly outputting false statements. Hence, it is of interest and importance to develop methods to detect when LLMs lie. Indeed, several authors trained classifiers to detect LLM lies based on their internal model activations. However, other researchers showed that these classifiers may fail to generalise, for example to negated statements. In this work, we aim to develop a robust method to detect when an LLM is lying. To this end, we make the following key contributions: (i) We demonstrate the existence of a two-dimensional subspace, along which the activation vectors of true and false statements can be separated. Notably, this finding is universal and holds for various LLMs, including Gemma-7B, LLaMA2-13B, Mistral-7B and LLaMA3-8B. Our analysis explains the generalisation failures observed in previous studies and sets the stage for more robust lie detection; (ii) Building upon (i), we construct an accurate LLM lie detector. Empirically, our proposed classifier achieves state-of-the-art performance, attaining 94% accuracy in both distinguishing true from false factual statements and detecting lies generated in real-world scenarios.14d:T668,Large language models are often ranked according to their level of alignment with human preferences---a model is better than other models if its outputs are more frequently preferred by humans. One of the popular ways to elicit human preferences utilizes pairwise comparisons between the outputs provided by different models to the same inputs. However, since gathering pairwise comparisons by humans is costly and time-consuming, it has become a common practice to gather pairwise comparisons by a strong large language model---a model strongly aligned with human preferences. Surprisingly, practitioners cannot currently measure the uncertainty that any mismatch between human and model preferences may introduce in the constructed rankings. In this work, we develop a statistical framework to bridge this gap. Given a (small) set of pairwise comparisons by humans and a large set of pairwise comparisons by a model, our framework provides a rank-set---a set of possible ranking positions---for each of the models under comparison. Moreover, it guarantees that, with a probability greater than or equal to a user-specified value, the rank-sets cover the true ranking consistent with the distribution of human pairwise preferences asymptotically. Using pairwise comparisons made by humans in the LMSYS Chatbot Arena platform and pairwise comparisons made by three strong large language models, we empirically demonstrate the effectivity of our framework and show that the rank-sets constructed using only pairwise comparisons by the strong large language models are often inconsistent with (the distribution of) human pairwise preferences.14e:T446,We propose **Quan**tum-informed **T**ensor **A**daptation (**QuanTA**), a novel, easy-to-implement, fine-tuning method with no inference overhead for large-scale pre-trained language models. By leveraging quantum-inspired methods derived from quantum circuit structures, QuanTA enables efficient *high-rank* fine-tuning, surpassing the limitations of Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA)---low-rank approximation may fail for complicated downstream tasks. Our approach is theoretically supported by the universality theorem and the rank representation theorem to achieve efficient high-rank adaptations. Experiments demonstrate that QuanTA significantly enhances commonsense reasoning, arithmetic reasoning, and scalability compared to traditional methods. Furthermore, QuanTA shows superior performance with fewer trainable parameters compared to other approaches and can be designed to integrate with existing fine-tuning algorithms for further improvement, providing a scalable and efficient solution for fine-tuning large language models and advancing state-of-the-art in natural language processing.14f:T602,Diffusion models (DMs) have shown remarkable capabilities in generating realistic high-quality images, audios, and videos. 
They benefit significantly from extensive pre-training on large-scale datasets, including web-crawled data with paired data and conditions, such as image-text and image-class pairs.
Despite rigorous filtering, these pre-training datasets often inevitably contain corrupted pairs where conditions do not accurately describe the data. 
This paper presents the first comprehensive study on the impact of such corruption in pre-training data of DMs.
We synthetically corrupt ImageNet-1K and CC3M to pre-train and evaluate over $50$ conditional DMs. 
Our empirical findings reveal that various types of slight corruption in pre-training can significantly enhance the quality, diversity, and fidelity of the generated images across different DMs, both during pre-training and downstream adaptation stages. 
Theoretically, we consider a Gaussian mixture model and prove that slight corruption in the condition leads to higher entropy and a reduced 2-Wasserstein distance to the ground truth of the data distribution generated by the corruptly trained DMs.
Inspired by our analysis, we propose a simple method to improve the training of DMs on practical datasets by adding condition embedding perturbations (CEP).
CEP significantly improves the performance of various DMs in both pre-training and downstream tasks.
We hope that our study provides new insights into understanding the data and pre-training processes of DMs.150:T777,Large vision-language models (LVLMs) have recently achieved rapid progress, sparking numerous studies to evaluate their multi-modal capabilities. However, we dig into current evaluation works and identify two primary issues: 1) Visual content is unnecessary for many samples. The answers can be directly inferred from the questions and options, or the world knowledge embedded in LLMs. This phenomenon is prevalent across current benchmarks. For instance, GeminiPro achieves 42.7% on the MMMU benchmark without any visual input, and outperforms the random choice baseline across six benchmarks near 24% on average. 2) Unintentional data leakage exists in LLM and LVLM training. LLM and LVLM could still answer some visual-necessary questions without visual content, indicating the memorizing of these samples within large-scale training data. For example, Sphinx-X-MoE gets 43.6% on MMMU without accessing images, surpassing its LLM backbone with 17.9%. Both problems lead to misjudgments of actual multi-modal gains and potentially misguide the study of LVLM. To this end, we present MMStar, an elite vision-indispensable multi-modal benchmark comprising 1,500 samples meticulously selected by humans. MMStar benchmarks 6 core capabilities and 18 detailed axes, aiming to evaluate LVLMs' multi-modal capacities with carefully balanced and purified samples. These samples are first roughly selected from current benchmarks with an automated pipeline, human review is then involved to ensure each curated sample exhibits visual dependency, minimal data leakage, and requires advanced multi-modal capabilities. Moreover, two metrics are developed to measure data leakage and actual performance gain in multi-modal training. We evaluate 16 leading LVLMs on MMStar to assess their multi-modal capabilities, and on 7 benchmarks with the proposed metrics to investigate their data leakage and actual multi-modal gain.151:T58b,Large vision language models (LVLMs) often suffer from object hallucination, producing objects not present in the given images. 
While current benchmarks for object hallucination primarily concentrate on the presence of a single object class rather than individual entities, this work systematically investigates multi-object hallucination, examining how models misperceive (e.g., invent nonexistent objects or become distracted) when tasked with focusing on multiple objects simultaneously.
We introduce Recognition-based Object Probing Evaluation (ROPE), an automated evaluation protocol that considers the distribution of object classes within a single image during testing and uses visual referring prompts to eliminate ambiguity. 
With comprehensive empirical studies and analysis of potential factors leading to multi-object hallucination, we found that (1) LVLMs suffer more hallucinations when focusing on multiple objects compared to a single object. 
(2) The tested object class distribution affects hallucination behaviors, indicating that LVLMs may follow shortcuts and spurious correlations.
(3) Hallucinatory behaviors are influenced by data-specific factors, salience and frequency, and model intrinsic behaviors.
We hope to enable LVLMs to recognize and reason about multiple objects that often occur in realistic visual scenes, provide insights, and quantify our progress towards mitigating the issues.152:T4a0,The use of guidance in diffusion models was originally motivated by the premise that the guidance-modified score is that of the data distribution tilted by a conditional likelihood raised to some power. In this work we clarify this misconception by rigorously proving that guidance fails to sample from the intended tilted distribution. Our main result is to give a fine-grained characterization of the dynamics of guidance in two cases, (1) mixtures of compactly supported distributions and (2) mixtures of Gaussians, which reflect salient properties of guidance that manifest on real-world data. In both cases, we prove that as the guidance parameter increases, the guided model samples more heavily from the boundary of the support of the conditional distribution. We also prove that for any nonzero level of score estimation error, sufficiently large guidance will result in sampling away from the support, theoretically justifying the empirical finding that large guidance results in distorted generations. In addition to verifying these results empirically in synthetic settings, we also show how our theoretical insights can offer useful prescriptions for practical deployment.153:T5b5,Structured state-space models (SSMs) are gaining popularity as effective foundational architectures for sequential data, demonstrating outstanding performance across a diverse set of domains alongside desirable scalability properties. Recent developments show that if the linear recurrence powering SSMs allows for a selectivity mechanism leveraging multiplicative interactions between inputs and hidden states (e.g. Mamba, GLA, Hawk/Griffin, HGRN2), then the resulting architecture can surpass attention-powered foundation models trained on text in both accuracy and efficiency, at scales of billion parameters. In this paper, we give theoretical grounding to the selectivity mechanism, often linked to in-context learning, using tools from Rough Path Theory. We provide a framework for the theoretical analysis of generalized selective SSMs, fully characterizing their expressive power and identifying the gating mechanism as the crucial architectural choice. Our analysis provides a closed-form description of the expressive powers of modern SSMs, such as Mamba, quantifying theoretically the drastic improvement in performance from the previous generation of models, such as S4. Our theory not only motivates the success of modern selective state-space models, but also provides a solid framework to understand the expressive power of future SSM variants. In particular, it suggests cross-channel interactions could play a vital role in future improvements.154:T531,In this paper, we delve deeper into the Kullback–Leibler (KL) Divergence loss and mathematically prove that it is equivalent to the Decoupled Kullback-Leibler (DKL) Divergence loss that consists of 1) a weighted Mean Square Error ($\mathbf{w}$MSE) loss and 2) a Cross-Entropy loss incorporating soft labels. 
Thanks to the decomposed formulation of DKL loss, we have identified two areas for improvement. 
Firstly, we address the limitation of KL/DKL in scenarios like knowledge distillation by breaking its asymmetric optimization property. This modification ensures that the $\mathbf{w}$MSE component is always effective during training, providing extra constructive cues.
Secondly, we introduce class-wise global information into KL/DKL to mitigate bias from individual samples.
With these two enhancements, we derive the Improved Kullback–Leibler (IKL) Divergence loss and evaluate its effectiveness by conducting experiments on CIFAR-10/100 and ImageNet datasets, focusing on adversarial training, and knowledge distillation tasks. The proposed approach achieves new state-of-the-art adversarial robustness on the public leaderboard --- \textit{RobustBench} and competitive performance on knowledge distillation, demonstrating the substantial practical merits. Our code is available at https://github.com/jiequancui/DKL.155:T4bd,In this work we consider Code World Models, world models generated by a Large Language Model (LLM) in the form of Python code for model-based Reinforcement Learning (RL). Calling code instead of LLMs for planning has potential to be more precise, reliable, interpretable, and extremely efficient.
However, writing appropriate Code World Models requires the ability to understand complex instructions, to generate exact code with non-trivial logic and to self-debug a long program with feedback from unit tests and environment trajectories. To address these challenges, we propose Generate, Improve and Fix with Monte Carlo Tree Search (GIF-MCTS), a new code generation strategy for LLMs. To test our approach in an offline RL setting, we introduce the Code World Models Benchmark (CWMB), a suite of program synthesis and planning tasks comprised of 18 diverse RL environments paired with corresponding textual descriptions and curated trajectories. GIF-MCTS surpasses all baselines on the CWMB and two other benchmarks, and we show that the Code World Models synthesized with it can be successfully used for planning, resulting in model-based RL agents with greatly improved sample efficiency and inference speed.156:T69b,Set theory is foundational to mathematics and, when sets are finite, to reasoning about the world. An intelligent system should perform set operations consistently, regardless of superficial variations in the operands. Initially designed for semantically-oriented NLP tasks, large language models (LLMs) are now being evaluated on algorithmic tasks. Because sets are comprised of arbitrary symbols (e.g. numbers, words), they provide an opportunity to test, systematically, the invariance of LLMs' algorithmic abilities under simple lexical or semantic variations. To this end, we present the SetLexSem Challenge, a synthetic benchmark that evaluates the performance of LLMs on set operations. SetLexSem assesses the robustness of LLMs' instruction-following abilities under various conditions, focusing on the set operations and the nature and construction of the set members. Evaluating seven LLMs with SetLexSem, we find that they exhibit poor robustness to variation in both operation and operands. We show -- via the framework's systematic sampling of set members along lexical and semantic dimensions -- that LLMs are not only not robust to variation along these dimensions but demonstrate unique failure modes in particular, easy-to-create semantic groupings of"deceptive"sets. We find that rigorously measuring language model robustness to variation in frequency and length is challenging and present an analysis that measures them independently. The code for reproducing the results of this paper, and for generating the SetLexSem Challenge dataset, is available at \href{https://github.com/amazon-science/SetLexSem-Challenge}{https://github.com/amazon-science/SetLexSem-Challenge}.157:T548,Amidst the recent strides in evaluating Large Language Models for Code (Code LLMs), existing benchmarks have mainly focused on the functional correctness of generated code, neglecting the importance of their computational efficiency. To fill the gap, we present Mercury, the first code efficiency benchmark for Code LLMs. It comprises 1,889 Python tasks, each accompanied by adequate solutions that serve as real-world efficiency baselines, enabling a comprehensive analysis of the runtime distribution. Based on the distribution, we introduce a new metric Beyond, which computes a runtime-percentile-weighted Pass score to reflect functional correctness and code efficiency simultaneously. On Mercury, leading Code LLMs can achieve 65% on Pass, while less than 50% on Beyond. Given that an ideal Beyond score would be aligned with the Pass score, it indicates that while Code LLMs exhibit impressive capabilities in generating functionally correct code, there remains a notable gap in their efficiency. Finally, our empirical experiments reveal that Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) serves as a robust baseline for enhancing code efficiency compared with Supervised Fine Tuning (SFT), which paves a promising avenue for future exploration of efficient code generation. Our code and data are available on GitHub: https://github.com/Elfsong/Mercury.158:T621,Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly deployed in various applications. As their usage grows, concerns regarding their safety are rising, especially in maintaining harmless responses when faced with malicious instructions. Many defense strategies have been developed to enhance the safety of LLMs. However, our research finds that existing defense strategies lead LLMs to predominantly adopt a rejection-oriented stance, thereby diminishing the usability of their responses to benign instructions. To solve this problem, we introduce the MoGU framework, designed to enhance LLMs’ safety while preserving their usability. Our MoGU framework transforms the base LLM into two variants: the usable LLM and the safe LLM, and further employs dynamic routing to balance their contribution. When encountering malicious instructions, the router will assign a higher weight to the safe LLM to ensure that responses are harmless. Conversely, for benign instructions, the router prioritizes the usable LLM, facilitating usable and helpful responses. On various LLMs, we compare multiple defense strategies to verify the superiority of our MoGU framework. Besides, our analysis provides key insights into the effectiveness of MoGU and verifies that our designed routing mechanism can effectively balance the contribution of each variant by assigning weights. Our work released the safer Llama2 7 B , Vicuna 7 B , Falcon 7 B , Dolphin 7 B , and Baichuan2 7 B at github 2 . Warning: This paper presents examples of malicious instructions that may be offensive and upsetting.159:T6a9,As Large Language Models (LLMs) are integrated into critical real-world applications, their strategic and logical reasoning abilities are increasingly crucial. This paper evaluates LLMs' reasoning abilities in competitive environments through game-theoretic tasks, e.g., board and card games that require pure logic and strategic reasoning to compete with opponents. We first propose GTBench, a language-driven environment composing 10 widely-recognized tasks, across a comprehensive game taxonomy: complete versus incomplete information, dynamic versus static, and probabilistic versus deterministic scenarios. Then, we (1) Characterize the game-theoretic reasoning of LLMs; and (2) Perform LLM-vs.-LLM competitions as reasoning evaluation. We observe that (1) LLMs have distinct behaviors regarding various gaming scenarios; for example, LLMs fail in complete and deterministic games yet they are competitive in probabilistic gaming scenarios; (2) Most open-source LLMs, e.g., CodeLlama-34b-Instruct and Llama-2-70b-chat, are less competitive than commercial LLMs, e.g., GPT-4, in complex games, yet the recently released Llama-3-70b-Instruct makes up for this shortcoming. In addition, code-pretraining greatly benefits strategic reasoning, while advanced reasoning methods such as Chain-of-Thought (CoT) and Tree-of-Thought (ToT) do not always help. We further characterize the game-theoretic properties of LLMs, such as equilibrium and Pareto Efficiency in repeated games. Detailed error profiles are provided for a better understanding of LLMs' behavior. We hope our research provides standardized protocols and serves as a foundation to spur further explorations in the strategic reasoning of LLMs.15a:T4c9,Despite significant advancements in text generation and reasoning, Large Language Models (LLMs) still face challenges in accurately performing complex arithmetic operations. Language model systems often enable LLMs to generate code for arithmetic operations to achieve accurate calculations. However, this approach compromises speed and security, and fine-tuning risks the language model losing prior capabilities. We propose a framework that enables exact arithmetic in a single autoregressive step, providing faster, more secure, and more interpretable LLM systems with arithmetic capabilities. We use the hidden states of a LLM to control a symbolic architecture that performs arithmetic. Our implementation using Llama 3 with OccamNet as a symbolic model (OccamLlama) achieves 100\% accuracy on single arithmetic operations ($+,-,\times,\div,\sin{},\cos{},\log{},\exp{},\sqrt{}$), outperforming GPT 4o with and without a code interpreter. Furthermore, OccamLlama outperforms GPT 4o with and without a code interpreter on average across a range of mathematical problem solving benchmarks, demonstrating that OccamLLMs can excel in arithmetic tasks, even surpassing much larger models. We will make our code public shortly.15b:T6e1,Despite their remarkable successes, state-of-the-art large language models (LLMs), including vision-and-language models (VLMs) and unimodal language models (ULMs), fail to understand precise semantics. For example, semantically equivalent sentences expressed using different lexical compositions elicit diverging representations. The degree of this divergence and its impact on encoded semantics is not very well understood. In this paper, we introduce the SUGARCREPE++ dataset to analyze the sensitivity of VLMs and ULMs to lexical and semantic alterations. Each sample in SUGARCREPE++ dataset consists of an image and a corresponding triplet of captions: a pair of semantically equivalent but lexically different positive captions and one hard negative caption. This poses a 3-way semantic (in)equivalence problem to the language models. We comprehensively evaluate VLMs and ULMs that differ in architecture, pre-training objectives and datasets to benchmark the performance of SUGARCREPE++ dataset. Experimental results highlight the difficulties of VLMs in distinguishing between lexical and semantic variations, particularly in object attributes and spatial relations. Although VLMs with larger pre-training datasets, model sizes, and multiple pre-training objectives achieve better performance on SUGARCREPE++, there is a significant opportunity for improvement. We show that all the models which achieve better performance on compositionality datasets need not perform equally well on SUGARCREPE++, signifying that compositionality alone may not be sufficient for understanding semantic and lexical alterations. Given the importance of the property that the SUGARCREPE++ dataset targets, it serves as a new challenge to the vision-and-language community.15c:T4e9,As Large Language Models (LLMs) demonstrate impressive capabilities, demystifying their internal mechanisms becomes increasingly vital. Neuron attribution, which attributes LLM outputs to specific neurons to reveal the semantic properties they learn, has emerged as a key interpretability approach. However, while neuron attribution has made significant progress in deciphering text-only LLMs, its application to Multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) remains less explored. To address this gap, we propose a novel Neuron Attribution method tailored for MLLMs, termed NAM. Specifically, NAM not only reveals the modality-specific semantic knowledge learned by neurons within MLLMs, but also highlights several intriguing properties of neurons, such as cross-modal invariance and semantic sensitivity. These properties collectively elucidate the inner workings mechanism of MLLMs, providing a deeper understanding of how MLLMs process and generate multi-modal content. Through theoretical analysis and empirical validation, we demonstrate the efficacy of NAM and the valuable insights it offers. Furthermore, leveraging NAM, we introduce a multi-modal knowledge editing paradigm, underscoring the practical significance of our approach for downstream applications of MLLMs.15d:T525,Transformer-based diffusion models have achieved significant advancements across a variety of generative tasks. However, producing high-quality outputs typically necessitates large transformer models, which result in substantial training and inference overhead. In this work, we investigate an alternative approach involving multiple experts for denoising, and introduce RemixDiT, a novel method designed to enhance output quality at a low cost. The goal of RemixDiT is to craft N diffusion experts for different denoising timesteps, yet without the need for expensive training of N independent models. To achieve this, RemixDiT employs K basis models (where K < N) and utilizes learnable mixing coefficients to adaptively craft expert models. This design offers two significant advantages: first, although the total model size is increased, the model produced by the mixing operation shares the same architecture as a plain model, making the overall model as efficient as a standard diffusion transformer. Second, the learnable mixing adaptively allocates model capacity across timesteps, thereby effectively improving generation quality. Experiments conducted on the ImageNet dataset demonstrate that RemixDiT achieves promising results compared to standard diffusion transformers and other multiple-expert methods.15e:T4a0,To ensure large language models (LLMs) are used safely, one must reduce their propensity to hallucinate or to generate unacceptable answers. A simple and often used strategy is to first let the LLM generate multiple hypotheses and then employ a reranker to choose the best one. In this paper, we draw a parallel between this strategy and the use of redundancy to decrease the error rate in noisy communication channels. We conceptualize the generator as a sender transmitting multiple descriptions of a message through parallel noisy channels. The receiver decodes the message by ranking the (potentially corrupted) descriptions and selecting the one found to be most reliable. We provide conditions under which this protocol is asymptotically error-free (i.e., yields an acceptable answer almost surely) even in scenarios where the reranker is imperfect (governed by Mallows or Zipf-Mandelbrot models) and the channel distributions are statistically dependent. We use our framework to obtain reranking laws which we validate empirically on two real-world tasks using LLMs: text-to-code generation with DeepSeek-Coder 7B and machine translation of medical data with TowerInstruct 13B.15f:T70e,The rapid progress in generative models has resulted in impressive leaps in generation quality, blurring the lines between synthetic and real data. Web-scale datasets are now prone to the inevitable contamination by synthetic data, directly impacting the training of future generated models.
    Already, some theoretical results on self-consuming generative models (a.k.a., iterative retraining) have emerged in the literature, showcasing that either model collapse or stability could be possible depending on the fraction of generated data used at each retraining step.
    However, in practice, synthetic data is often subject to human feedback and curated by users before being used and uploaded online. For instance, many interfaces of popular text-to-image generative models, such as Stable Diffusion or Midjourney, produce several variations of an image for a given query which can eventually be curated by the users.
    In this paper, we theoretically study the impact of data curation on iterated retraining of generative models and show that it can be seen as an implicit preference optimization mechanism. However, unlike standard preference optimization, the generative model does not have access to the reward function or negative samples needed for pairwise comparisons. Moreover, our study doesn't require access to the density function, only to samples. We prove that, if the data is curated according to a reward model, then the expected reward of the iterative retraining procedure is maximized. We further provide theoretical results on the stability of the retraining loop when using a positive fraction of real data at each step. Finally, we conduct illustrative experiments on both synthetic datasets and on CIFAR10 showing that such a procedure amplifies biases of the reward model.160:T6f0,Continual learning (CL) empowers pre-trained vision-language (VL) models to efficiently adapt to a sequence of downstream tasks. However, these models often encounter challenges in retaining previously acquired skills due to parameter shifts and limited access to historical data. In response, recent efforts focus on devising specific frameworks and various replay strategies, striving for a typical learning-forgetting trade-off. Surprisingly, both our empirical research and theoretical analysis demonstrate that the stability of the model in consecutive zero-shot predictions serves as a reliable indicator of its anti-forgetting capabilities for previously learned tasks. 
Motivated by these insights, we develop a novel replay-free CL method named ZAF (Zero-shot Antidote to Forgetting), which preserves acquired knowledge through a zero-shot stability regularization applied to wild data in a plug-and-play manner. To enhance efficiency in adapting to new tasks and seamlessly access historical models, we introduce a parameter-efficient EMA-LoRA neural architecture based on the Exponential Moving Average (EMA). ZAF utilizes new data for low-rank adaptation (LoRA), complemented by a zero-shot antidote on wild data, effectively decoupling learning from forgetting. Our extensive experiments demonstrate ZAF's superior performance and robustness in pre-trained models across various continual VL concept learning tasks, achieving leads of up to 3.70\%, 4.82\%, and 4.38\%, along with at least a 10x acceleration in training speed on three benchmarks, respectively. Additionally, our zero-shot antidote significantly reduces forgetting in existing models by at least 6.37\%. Our code is available at https://github.com/Zi-Jian-Gao/Stabilizing-Zero-Shot-Prediction-ZAF.161:T57f,Biological sequences encode fundamental instructions for the building blocks of life, in the form of DNA, RNA, and proteins. Modeling these sequences is key to understand disease mechanisms and is an active research area in computational biology. Recently, Large Language Models have shown great promise in solving certain biological tasks but current approaches are limited to a single sequence modality (DNA, RNA, or protein). Key problems in genomics intrinsically involve multiple modalities, but it remains unclear how to adapt general-purpose sequence models to those cases. In this work we propose a multi-modal model that connects DNA, RNA, and proteins by leveraging information from different pre-trained modality-specific encoders. We demonstrate its capabilities by applying it to the largely unsolved problem of predicting how multiple \rna transcript isoforms originate from the same gene (i.e. same DNA sequence) and map to different transcription expression levels across various human tissues. We show that our model, dubbed IsoFormer, is able to accurately predict differential transcript expression, outperforming existing methods and leveraging the use of multiple modalities. Our framework also achieves efficient transfer knowledge from the encoders pre-training as well as in between modalities. We open-source our model, paving the way for new multi-modal gene expression approaches.162:T527,Generative text-to-image models enable us to synthesize unlimited amounts of images in a controllable manner, spurring many recent efforts to train vision models with synthetic data. However, every synthetic image ultimately originates from the upstream data used to train the generator. Does the intermediate generator provide additional information over directly training on relevant parts of the upstream data? 
Grounding this question in the setting of image classification, we compare finetuning on task-relevant, targeted synthetic data generated by Stable Diffusion---a generative model trained on the LAION-2B dataset---against finetuning on targeted real images retrieved directly from LAION-2B. We show that while synthetic data can benefit some downstream tasks, it is universally matched or outperformed by real data from the simple retrieval baseline. Our analysis suggests that this underperformance is partially due to generator artifacts and inaccurate task-relevant visual details in the synthetic images. Overall, we argue that targeted retrieval is a critical baseline to consider when training with synthetic data---a baseline that current methods do not yet surpass. We release code, data, and models at [https://github.com/scottgeng00/unmet-promise/](https://github.com/scottgeng00/unmet-promise).163:T44a,Neural Algorithmic Reasoning (NAR) research has demonstrated that graph neural networks (GNNs) could learn to execute classical algorithms. However, most previous approaches have always used a recurrent architecture, where each iteration of the GNN matches an iteration of the algorithm. In this paper we study neurally solving algorithms from a different perspective: since the algorithm’s solution is often an equilibrium, it is possible to find the solution directly by solving an equilibrium equation. Our approach requires no information on the ground-truth number of steps of the algorithm, both during train and test time. Furthermore, the proposed method improves the performance of GNNs on executing algorithms and is a step towards speeding up existing NAR models. Our empirical evidence, leveraging algorithms from the CLRS-30 benchmark, validates that one can train a network to solve algorithmic problems by directly finding the equilibrium. We discuss the practical implementation of such models and propose regularisations to improve the performance of these equilibrium reasoners.164:T76c,Recent progress in self-supervised (SSL) visual representation learning has led to the development of several different proposed frameworks that rely on augmentations of images but use different loss functions. 
However, there are few theoretically grounded principles to guide practice, so practical implementation of each SSL framework requires several heuristics to achieve competitive performance.
In this work, we build on recent analytical results to design practical recommendations for competitive and efficient SSL that are grounded in theory. 
Specifically, recent theory tells us that existing SSL frameworks are actually minimizing the same idealized loss, which is to learn features that best match the data similarity kernel defined by the augmentations used.
We show how this idealized loss can be reformulated to a functionally equivalent loss that is more efficient to compute.
We study the implicit bias of using gradient descent to minimize our reformulated loss function, and find that using a stronger orthogonalization constraint with a reduced projector dimensionality should yield good representations.
Furthermore, the theory tells us that approximating the reformulated loss should be improved by increasing the number of augmentations, and as such using multiple augmentations should lead to improved convergence.
We empirically verify our findings on CIFAR, STL and Imagenet datasets, wherein we demonstrate an improved linear readout performance when training a ResNet-backbone using our theoretically grounded recommendations.  
Remarkably, we also demonstrate that by leveraging these insights, we can reduce the pretraining dataset size by up to 2$\times$ while maintaining downstream accuracy simply by using more data augmentations. 
Taken together, our work provides theoretically grounded recommendations that can be used to improve SSL convergence and efficiency.165:T4f7,The recently introduced Consistency models pose an efficient alternative to diffusion algorithms, enabling rapid and good quality image synthesis. These methods overcome the slowness of diffusion models by directly mapping noise to data, while maintaining a (relatively) simpler training. Consistency models enable a fast one- or few-step generation, but they typically fall somewhat short in sample quality when compared to their diffusion origins. 
In this work we propose a novel and highly effective technique for post-processing Consistency-based generated images, enhancing their perceptual quality. Our approach utilizes a joint classifier-discriminator model, in which both portions are trained adversarially. While the classifier aims to grade an image based on its assignment to a designated class, the discriminator portion of the very same network leverages the softmax values to assess the proximity of the input image to the targeted data manifold, thereby serving as an Energy-based Model. By employing example-specific projected gradient iterations under the guidance of this joint machine, we refine synthesized images and achieve an improved FID scores on the ImageNet 64x64 dataset for both Consistency-Training and Consistency-Distillation techniques.166:T52c,Diffusion models have emerged as a powerful tool for generating high-quality images from textual descriptions. Despite their successes, these models often exhibit limited diversity in the sampled images, particularly when sampling with a high classifier-free guidance weight. To address this issue, we present Kaleido, a novel approach that enhances the diversity of samples by incorporating autoregressive latent priors. Kaleido integrates an autoregressive language model that encodes the original caption and generates latent variables, serving as abstract and intermediary representations for guiding and facilitating the image generation process. In this paper, we explore a variety of discrete latent representations, including textual descriptions, detection bounding boxes, object blobs, and visual tokens. These representations diversify and enrich the input conditions to the diffusion models, enabling more diverse outputs. Our experimental results demonstrate that Kaleido effectively broadens the diversity of the generated image samples from a given textual description while maintaining high image quality. Furthermore, we show that Kaleido adheres closely to the guidance provided by the generated latent variables, demonstrating its capability to effectively control and direct the image generation process.167:T5d0,Large language models (LLMs) exhibit hallucinations in long-form question-answering tasks across various domains and wide applications. Current hallucination detection and mitigation datasets are limited in domains and sizes, which struggle to scale due to prohibitive labor costs and insufficient reliability of existing hallucination annotators. To facilitate the scalable oversight of LLM hallucinations, this paper introduces an iterative self-training framework that simultaneously and progressively scales up the hallucination annotation dataset and improves the accuracy of the hallucination annotator. Based on the Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm, in each iteration, the framework first applies a hallucination annotation pipeline to annotate a scaled dataset and then trains a more accurate hallucination annotator on the dataset. This new hallucination annotator is adopted in the hallucination annotation pipeline used for the next iteration. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that the finally obtained hallucination annotator with only 7B parameters surpasses the performance of GPT-4 and obtains new state-of-the-art hallucination detection results on HaluEval and HalluQA by zero-shot inference. Such an annotator can not only evaluate the hallucination levels of various LLMs on the large-scale dataset but also help to mitigate the hallucination of LLMs generations, with the Natural Language Inference (NLI) metric increasing from 25% to 37% on HaluEval.168:T497,Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly used in applications where LLM inputs may span many different tasks. Recent work has found that the choice of LLM is consequential, and different LLMs may be good for different input samples. Prior approaches have thus explored how engineers might select an LLM to use for each sample (i.e. routing). While existing routing methods mostly require training auxiliary models on human-annotated data, our work explores whether it is possible to perform unsupervised routing. We propose Smoothie, a weak supervision-inspired routing approach that requires no labeled data. Given a set of outputs from different LLMs, Smoothie constructs a latent variable graphical model over embedding representations of observable LLM outputs and unknown"true"outputs. Using this graphical model, we estimate sample-dependent quality scores for each LLM, and route each sample to the LLM with the highest corresponding score. We find that Smoothie's LLM quality-scores correlate with ground-truth model quality (correctly identifying the optimal model on 9/14 tasks), and that Smoothie outperforms baselines for routing by up to 10 points accuracy.169:T67e,Domain Generalization (DG) aims to enable models to generalize to unseen target domains by learning from multiple source domains. Existing DG methods primarily rely on convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which inherently learn texture biases due to their limited receptive fields, making them prone to overfitting source domains. While some works have introduced transformer-based methods (ViTs) for DG to leverage the global receptive field, these methods incur high computational costs due to the quadratic complexity of self-attention. Recently, advanced state space models (SSMs), represented by Mamba, have shown promising results in supervised learning tasks by achieving linear complexity in sequence length during training and fast RNN-like computation during inference. Inspired by this, we investigate the generalization ability of the Mamba model under domain shifts and find that input-dependent matrices within SSMs could accumulate and amplify domain-specific features, thus hindering model generalization. To address this issue, we propose a novel SSM-based architecture with saliency-based token-aware transformation (namely START), which achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performances and offers a competitive alternative to CNNs and ViTs. Our START can selectively perturb and suppress domain-specific features in salient tokens within the input-dependent matrices of SSMs, thus effectively reducing the discrepancy between different domains. Extensive experiments on five benchmarks demonstrate that START outperforms existing SOTA DG methods with efficient linear complexity. Our code is available at https://github.com/lingeringlight/START.16a:T599,Diffusion models have demonstrated empirical successes in various applications and can be adapted to task-specific needs via guidance. This paper studies a form of gradient guidance for adapting a pre-trained diffusion model towards optimizing user-specified objectives. We establish a mathematical framework for guided diffusion to systematically study its optimization theory and algorithmic design. Our theoretical analysis spots a strong link between guided diffusion models and optimization: gradient-guided diffusion models are essentially sampling solutions to a regularized optimization problem, where the regularization is imposed by the pre-training data. As for guidance design, directly bringing in the gradient of an external objective function as guidance would jeopardize the structure in generated samples. We investigate a modified form of gradient guidance based on a forward prediction loss, which leverages the information in pre-trained score functions and provably preserves the latent structure. We further consider an iteratively fine-tuned version of gradient-guided diffusion where guidance and score network are both updated with newly generated samples. This process mimics a first-order optimization iteration in expectation, for which we proved O(1/K) convergence rate to the global optimum when the objective function is concave. Our code will be released at https://github.com/yukang123/GGDMOptim.git.16b:T5a1,In order to thrive in hostile and ever-changing natural environments, mammalian brains evolved to store large amounts of knowledge about the world and continually integrate new information while avoiding catastrophic forgetting. Despite the impressive accomplishments, large language models (LLMs), even with retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), still struggle to efficiently and effectively integrate a large amount of new experiences after pre-training. In this work, we introduce HippoRAG, a novel retrieval framework inspired by the hippocampal indexing theory of human long-term memory to enable deeper and more efficient knowledge integration over new experiences. HippoRAG synergistically orchestrates LLMs, knowledge graphs, and the Personalized PageRank algorithm to mimic the different roles of neocortex and hippocampus in human memory. We compare HippoRAG with existing RAG methods on multi-hop question answering and show that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art methods remarkably, by up to 20%. Single-step retrieval with HippoRAG achieves comparable or better performance than iterative retrieval like IRCoT while being 10-30 times cheaper and 6-13 times faster, and integrating HippoRAG into IRCoT brings further substantial gains. Finally, we show that our method can tackle new types of scenarios that are out of reach of existing methods. Code and data are available at https://github.com/OSU-NLP-Group/HippoRAG.16c:T5ed,Diffusion models (DMs) produce very detailed and high-quality images. Their power results from extensive training on large amounts of data - usually scraped from the internet without proper attribution or consent from content creators.  Unfortunately, this practice raises privacy and intellectual property concerns, as DMs can memorize and later reproduce their potentially sensitive or copyrighted training images at inference time. Prior efforts prevent this issue by either changing the input to the diffusion process, thereby preventing the DM from generating memorized samples during inference, or removing the memorized data from training altogether. While those are viable solutions when the DM is developed and deployed in a secure and constantly monitored environment, they hold the risk of adversaries circumventing the safeguards and are not effective when the DM itself is publicly released. To solve the problem, we introduce NeMo, the first method to localize memorization of individual data samples down to the level of neurons in DMs' cross-attention layers. Through our experiments, we make the intriguing finding that in many cases, single neurons are responsible for memorizing particular training samples. By deactivating these memorization neurons, we can avoid the replication of training data at inference time, increase the diversity in the generated outputs, and mitigate the leakage of private and copyrighted data. In this way, our NeMo contributes to a more responsible deployment of DMs.16d:T4ad,As a heuristic for improving test accuracy in classification, the "flooding" method proposed by Ishida et al. (2020) sets a threshold for the average surrogate loss at training time; above the threshold, gradient descent is run as usual, but below the threshold, a switch to gradient *ascent* is made. While setting the threshold is non-trivial and is usually done with validation data, this simple technique has proved remarkably effective in terms of accuracy. On the other hand, what if we are also interested in other metrics such as model complexity or average surrogate loss at test time? As an attempt to achieve better overall performance with less fine-tuning, we propose a softened, pointwise mechanism called SoftAD (soft ascent-descent) that downweights points on the borderline, limits the effects of outliers, and retains the ascent-descent effect of flooding, with no additional computational overhead. We contrast formal stationarity guarantees with those for flooding, and empirically demonstrate how SoftAD can realize classification accuracy competitive with flooding (and the more expensive alternative SAM) while enjoying a much smaller loss generalization gap and model norm.16e:T54c,Large language models are probabilistic models, and the process of generating content is essentially sampling from the output distribution of the language model. Existing watermarking techniques inject watermarks into the generated content without altering the output quality. On the other hand, existing acceleration techniques, specifically speculative sampling, leverage a draft model to speed up the sampling process while preserving the output distribution. However, there is no known method to simultaneously accelerate the sampling process and inject watermarks into the generated content. In this paper, we investigate this direction and find that the integration of watermarking and acceleration is non-trivial. We prove a no-go theorem, which states that it is impossible to simultaneously maintain the highest watermark strength and the highest sampling efficiency. Furthermore, we propose two methods that maintain either the sampling efficiency or the watermark strength, but not both. Our work provides a rigorous theoretical foundation for understanding the inherent trade-off between watermark strength and sampling efficiency in accelerating the generation of watermarked tokens for large language models. We also conduct numerical experiments to validate our theoretical findings and demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed methods.16f:T606,Humans draw to facilitate reasoning: we draw auxiliary lines when solving geometry problems; we mark and circle when reasoning on maps; we use sketches to amplify our ideas and relieve our limited-capacity working memory. However, such actions are missing in current multimodal language models (LMs). Current chain-of-thought and tool-use paradigms only use text as intermediate reasoning steps. In this work, we introduce Sketchpad, a framework that gives multimodal LMs a visual sketchpad and tools to draw on the sketchpad. The LM conducts planning and reasoning according to the visual artifacts it has drawn. Different from prior work, which uses text-to-image models to enable LMs to draw, Sketchpad enables LMs to draw with lines, boxes, marks, etc., which is closer to human sketching and better facilitates reasoning. \name can also use specialist vision models during the sketching process (e.g., draw bounding boxes with object detection models, draw masks with segmentation models), to further enhance visual perception and reasoning. We experiment on a wide range of math tasks (including geometry, functions, graph, chess) and complex visual reasoning tasks. Sketchpad substantially improves performance on all tasks over strong base models with no sketching, yielding an average gain of 12.7% on math tasks, and 8.6% on vision tasks. GPT-4o with Sketchpad sets a new state of the art on all tasks, including V*Bench (80.3%), BLINK spatial reasoning (83.9%), and visual correspondence (80.8%). We will release all code and data.170:T692,We investigate the statistical and computational limits of latent **Di**ffusion **T**ransformers (**DiTs**) under the low-dimensional linear latent space assumption. Statistically, we study the universal approximation and sample complexity of the DiTs score function, as well as the distribution recovery property of the initial data. Specifically, under mild data assumptions, we derive an approximation error bound for the score network of latent DiTs, which is sub-linear in the latent space dimension. Additionally, we derive the corresponding sample complexity bound and show that the data distribution generated from the estimated score function converges toward a proximate area of the original one.
Computationally, we characterize the hardness of both forward inference and backward computation of latent DiTs, assuming the Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis (SETH). For forward inference, we identify efficient criteria for all possible latent DiTs inference algorithms and showcase our theory by pushing the efficiency toward almost-linear time inference. For backward computation, we leverage the low-rank structure within the gradient computation of DiTs training for possible algorithmic speedup. Specifically, we show that such speedup achieves almost-linear time latent DiTs training by casting the DiTs gradient as a series of chained low-rank approximations with bounded error.
Under the low-dimensional assumption, we show that the statistical rates and the computational efficiency are all dominated by the dimension of the subspace, suggesting that latent DiTs have the potential to bypass the challenges associated with the high dimensionality of initial data.171:T529,Deep neural networks have long been criticized for being black-box. To unveil the inner workings of modern neural architectures, a recent work proposed an information-theoretic objective function called Sparse Rate Reduction (SRR) and interpreted its unrolled optimization as a Transformer-like model called Coding Rate Reduction Transformer (CRATE). However, the focus of the study was primarily on the basic implementation, and whether this objective is optimized in practice and its causal relationship to generalization remain elusive. Going beyond this study, we derive different implementations by analyzing layer-wise behaviors of CRATE, both theoretically and empirically. To reveal the predictive power of SRR on generalization, we collect a set of model variants induced by varied implementations and hyperparameters and evaluate SRR as a complexity measure based on its correlation with generalization. Surprisingly, we find out that SRR has a positive correlation coefficient and outperforms other baseline measures, such as path-norm and sharpness-based ones. Furthermore, we show that generalization can be improved using SRR as regularization on benchmark image classification datasets. We hope this paper can shed light on leveraging SRR to design principled models and study their generalization ability.172:T568,Compositional Reasoning (CR) entails grasping the significance of attributes, relations, and word order. Recent Vision-Language Models (VLMs), comprising a visual encoder and a Large Language Model (LLM) decoder, have demonstrated remarkable proficiency in such reasoning tasks. This prompts a crucial question: have VLMs effectively tackled the CR challenge? We conjecture that existing CR benchmarks may not adequately push the boundaries of modern VLMs due to the reliance on an LLM only negative text generation pipeline. Consequently, the negatives produced either appear as outliers from the natural language distribution learned by VLMs' LLM decoders or as improbable within the corresponding image context. To address these limitations, we introduce ConMe\footnote{ConMe is an abbreviation for Confuse Me.} -- a compositional reasoning benchmark and a novel data generation pipeline leveraging VLMs to produce `hard CR Q&A'. Through a new concept of VLMs conversing with each other to collaboratively expose their weaknesses, our pipeline autonomously generates, evaluates, and selects challenging compositional reasoning questions, establishing a robust CR benchmark, also subsequently validated manually. Our benchmark provokes a noteworthy, up to 33%, decrease in CR performance compared to preceding benchmarks, reinstating the CR challenge even for state-of-the-art VLMs.173:T6e7,Large language models (LLMs) exhibit complementary strengths in various tasks, motivating the research of LLM ensembling.
However, existing work focuses on training an extra reward model or fusion model to select or combine all candidate answers, posing a great challenge to the generalization on unseen data distributions.
Besides, prior methods use textual responses as communication media, ignoring the valuable information in the internal representations.
In this work, we propose a training-free ensemble framework \textsc{DeePEn}, fusing the informative probability distributions yielded by different LLMs at each decoding step.
Unfortunately, the vocabulary discrepancy between heterogeneous LLMs directly makes averaging the distributions unfeasible due to the token misalignment.
To address this challenge, \textsc{DeePEn} maps the probability distribution of each model from its own probability space to a universal \textit{relative space} based on the relative representation theory, and performs aggregation.
Next, we devise a search-based inverse transformation to transform the aggregated result back to the probability space of one of the ensembling LLMs (main model), in order to determine the next token.
We conduct extensive experiments on ensembles of different number of LLMs, ensembles of LLMs with different architectures, and ensembles between the LLM and the specialist model.
Experimental results show that (i) \textsc{DeePEn} achieves consistent improvements across six benchmarks covering subject examination, reasoning, and knowledge, (ii) a well-performing specialist model can benefit from a less effective LLM through distribution fusion, and (iii) \textsc{DeePEn} has complementary strengths with other ensemble methods such as voting.174:T61b,Multi-modal contrastive learning with language supervision has presented a paradigm shift in modern machine learning. By pre-training on a web-scale dataset, multi-modal contrastive learning can learn high-quality representations that exhibit impressive robustness and transferability. Despite its empirical success, the theoretical understanding is still in its infancy, especially regarding its comparison with single-modal contrastive learning. In this work, we introduce a feature learning theory framework that provides a theoretical foundation for understanding the differences between multi-modal and single-modal contrastive learning. Based on a data generation model consisting of signal and noise, our analysis is performed on a ReLU network trained with the InfoMax objective function. Through a trajectory-based optimization analysis and generalization characterization on downstream tasks, we identify the critical factor, which is the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), that impacts the generalizability in downstream tasks of both multi-modal and single-modal contrastive learning. Through the cooperation between the two modalities, multi-modal learning can achieve better feature learning, leading to improvements in performance in downstream tasks compared to single-modal learning. Our analysis provides a unified framework that can characterize the optimization and generalization of both single-modal and multi-modal contrastive learning. Empirical experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets further consolidate our theoretical findings.175:T4fc,The visual medium (images and videos) naturally contains a large amount of information redundancy, thereby providing a great opportunity for leveraging efficiency in processing. While Vision Transformer (ViT) based models scale effectively to large data regimes, they fail to capitalize on this inherent redundancy, leading to higher computational costs. Mixture of Experts (MoE) networks demonstrate scalability while maintaining same inference-time costs, but they come with a larger parameter footprint. We present Mixture of Nested Experts (MoNE), which utilizes a nested structure for experts, wherein individual experts fall on an increasing compute-accuracy curve. Given a compute budget, MoNE learns to dynamically choose tokens in a priority order, and thus redundant tokens are processed through cheaper nested experts. Using this framework, we achieve equivalent performance as the baseline models, while reducing inference time compute by over two-fold. We validate our approach on standard image and video datasets - ImageNet-21K, Kinetics400, and Something-Something-v2. We further highlight MoNE's adaptability by showcasing its ability to maintain strong performance across different inference-time compute budgets on videos, using only a single trained model.176:T425,Recent advancements in solving Bayesian inverse problems have spotlighted denoising diffusion models (DDMs) as effective priors.
Although these have great potential, DDM priors yield complex posterior distributions that are challenging to sample from.
Existing approaches to posterior sampling in this context address this problem either by retraining model-specific components, leading to stiff and cumbersome methods, or by introducing approximations with uncontrolled errors that affect the accuracy of the produced samples.
We present an innovative framework, divide-and-conquer posterior sampling, which leverages the inherent structure of DDMs to construct a sequence of intermediate posteriors that guide the produced samples to the target posterior.
Our method significantly reduces the approximation error associated with current techniques without the need for retraining.
We demonstrate the versatility and effectiveness of our approach for a wide range of Bayesian inverse problems.
The code is available at \url{https://github.com/Badr-MOUFAD/dcps}177:T624,Neural embedding models have become a fundamental component of modern information retrieval (IR) pipelines. These models produce a single embedding $x \in \mathbb{R}^d$ per data-point, allowing for fast retrieval via highly optimized maximum inner product search (MIPS) algorithms. Recently, beginning with the landmark ColBERT paper, multi-vector models, which produce a set of embedding per data point, have achieved markedly superior performance for IR tasks. Unfortunately, using these models for IR is computationally expensive due to the increased complexity of multi-vector retrieval and scoring. 

In this paper, we introduce MUVERA (MUlti-VEctor Retrieval Algorithm), a retrieval mechanism which reduces multi-vector similarity search to single-vector similarity search. This enables the usage of off-the-shelf MIPS solvers for multi-vector retrieval. 
MUVERA asymmetrically generates Fixed Dimensional Encodings (FDEs) of queries and documents, which are vectors whose inner product approximates multi-vector similarity. We prove that FDEs give high-quality $\epsilon$-approximations, thus providing the first single-vector proxy for multi-vector similarity with theoretical guarantees. Empirically, we find that FDEs achieve the same recall as prior state-of-the-art heuristics while retrieving 2-5$\times$ fewer candidates. Compared to prior state of the art implementations, MUVERA achieves consistently good end-to-end recall and latency across a diverse set of the BEIR retrieval datasets, achieving an average of 10% improved recall with 90% lower latency.178:T5eb,Continual learning (CL) aims to help deep neural networks to learn new knowledge while retaining what has been learned. Owing to their powerful generalizability,  pre-trained vision-language models such as Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP)  have lately gained traction as practical CL candidates. However, the domain mismatch between the pre-training and the downstream CL tasks calls for finetuning of the CLIP on the latter. The deterministic nature of the existing finetuning methods makes them overlook the many possible interactions across the modalities and deems them unsafe for high-risk tasks requiring reliable uncertainty estimation. To address these, our work proposes **C**ontinual **L**e**A**rning with **P**robabilistic finetuning (CLAP) - a probabilistic modeling framework over visual-guided text features per task, thus providing more calibrated CL finetuning. Unlike recent data-hungry anti-forgetting CL techniques, CLAP alleviates forgetting by exploiting the rich pre-trained knowledge of CLIP for weight initialization and distribution regularization of task-specific parameters. Cooperating with the diverse range of existing prompting methods, CLAP can surpass the predominant deterministic finetuning approaches for CL with CLIP. We conclude with out-of-the-box applications of superior uncertainty estimation abilities of CLAP including novel data detection and exemplar selection within the existing CL setups. Our code is available at https://github.com/srvCodes/clap4clip.179:T599,Sparse training stands as a landmark approach in addressing the considerable training resource demands imposed by the continuously expanding size of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). However, the training of a sparse DNN encounters great challenges in achieving optimal generalization ability despite the efforts from the state-of-the-art sparse training methodologies. To unravel the mysterious reason behind the difficulty of sparse training, we connect the network sparsity with neural loss functions structure, and identify the cause of such difficulty lies in chaotic loss surface. In light of such revelation, we propose $S^{2} - SAM$, characterized by a **S**ingle-step **S**harpness_**A**ware **M**inimization that is tailored for **S**parse training. For the first time, $S^{2} - SAM$ innovates the traditional SAM-style optimization by approximating sharpness perturbation through prior gradient information, incurring *zero extra cost*. Therefore,  $S^{2} - SAM$ not only exhibits the capacity to improve generalization but also aligns with the efficiency goal of sparse training. Additionally, we study the generalization result of $S^{2} - SAM$ and provide theoretical proof for convergence. Through extensive experiments, $S^{2} - SAM$ demonstrates its universally applicable plug-and-play functionality, enhancing accuracy across various sparse training methods. Code available at https://github.com/jjsrf/SSAM-NEURIPS2024.17a:T50b,In recent years, pretraining models have made significant advancements in the fields of natural language processing (NLP), computer vision (CV), and life sciences. The significant advancements in NLP and CV are predominantly driven by the expansion of model parameters and data size, a phenomenon now recognized as the scaling laws. However, research exploring scaling law in molecular pretraining model remains unexplored. In this work, we present an innovative molecular pretraining model that leverages a two-track transformer to effectively integrate features at the atomic level, graph level, and geometry structure level. Along with this, we systematically investigate the scaling law within molecular pretraining models, examining the power-law correlations between validation loss and model size, dataset size, and computational resources. Consequently, we successfully scale the model to 1.1 billion parameters through pretraining on 800 million conformations, making it the largest molecular pretraining model to date. Extensive experiments show the consistent improvement on the downstream tasks as the model size grows up. The model with 1.1 billion parameters also outperform over existing methods, achieving an average 27\% improvement on the QM9 and 14\% on COMPAS-1D dataset.17b:T642,In the domain of code generation, self-debugging is crucial. It allows LLMs to refine their generated code based on execution feedback. This is particularly important because generating correct solutions in one attempt proves challenging for complex tasks. Prior works on self-debugging mostly focus on prompting methods by providing LLMs with few-shot examples, which work poorly on small open-sourced LLMs. In this work, we propose LeDex, a training framework that significantly improves the self-debugging capability of LLMs. Intuitively, we observe that a chain of explanations on the wrong code followed by code refinement helps LLMs better analyze the wrong code and do refinement. We thus propose an automated pipeline to collect a high-quality dataset for code explanation and refinement by generating a number of explanations and refinement trajectories from the LLM itself or a larger teacher model and filtering via execution verification. We perform supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and further reinforcement learning (RL) on both success and failure trajectories with a novel reward design considering code explanation and refinement quality. SFT improves the pass@1 by up to 15.92\% and pass@10 by 9.30\% over four benchmarks. RL training brings additional up to 3.54\% improvement on pass@1 and 2.55\% improvement on pass@10. The trained LLMs show iterative refinement ability and can keep refining code continuously. Lastly, our human evaluation shows that the LLMs trained with our framework generate more useful code explanations and help developers better understand bugs in source code.17c:T492,Recent State Space Models (SSMs) such as S4, S5, and Mamba have shown remarkable computational benefits in long-range temporal dependency modeling. However, in many sequence modeling problems, the underlying process is inherently modular and it is of interest to have inductive biases that mimic this modular structure. In this paper, we introduce SlotSSMs, a novel framework for incorporating independent mechanisms into SSMs to preserve or encourage separation of information. Unlike conventional SSMs that maintain a monolithic state vector, SlotSSMs maintains the state as a collection of multiple vectors called slots. Crucially, the state transitions are performed independently per slot with sparse interactions across slots implemented via the bottleneck of self-attention. In experiments, we evaluate our model in object-centric learning, 3D visual reasoning, and long-context video understanding tasks, which involve modeling multiple objects and their long-range temporal dependencies. We find that our proposed design offers substantial performance gains over existing sequence modeling methods. Project page is available at \url{https://slotssms.github.io/}17d:T68a,Fine-tuning on task-specific question-answer pairs is a predominant method for enhancing the performance of instruction-tuned large language models (LLMs) on downstream tasks. However, in certain specialized domains, such as healthcare or harmless content generation, it is nearly impossible to obtain a large volume of high-quality data that matches the downstream distribution. To improve the performance of LLMs in data-scarce domains with domain-mismatched data, we re-evaluated the Transformer architecture and discovered that not all parameter updates during fine-tuning contribute positively to downstream performance. Our analysis reveals that within the self-attention and feed-forward networks, only the fine-tuned attention parameters are particularly beneficial when the training set's distribution does not fully align with the test set. Based on this insight, we propose an effective inference-time intervention method: \uline{T}raining \uline{A}ll parameters but \uline{I}nferring with only \uline{A}ttention (TAIA). We empirically validate TAIA using two general instruction-tuning datasets and evaluate it on seven downstream tasks involving math, reasoning, and knowledge understanding across LLMs of different parameter sizes and fine-tuning techniques. Our comprehensive experiments demonstrate that TAIA achieves superior improvements compared to both the fully fine-tuned model and the base model in most scenarios, with significant performance gains. The high tolerance of TAIA to data mismatches makes it resistant to jailbreaking tuning and enhances specialized tasks using general data. Code is available in \url{https://github.com/pixas/TAIA_LLM}.17e:T540,Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) have significantly improved text generation capabilities, but these systems are still known to hallucinate, and granular uncertainty estimation for long-form LLM generations remains challenging. 
In this work, we propose Graph Uncertainty -- which represents the relationship between LLM generations and claims within them as a bipartite graph and estimates the claim-level uncertainty with a family of graph centrality metrics. Under this view, existing uncertainty estimation methods based on the concept of self-consistency can be viewed as using degree centrality as an uncertainty measure, and we show that more sophisticated alternatives such as closeness centrality provide consistent gains at claim-level uncertainty estimation.
Moreover, we present uncertainty-aware decoding techniques that leverage both the graph structure and uncertainty estimates to improve the factuality of LLM generations by preserving only the most reliable claims. Compared to existing methods, our graph-based uncertainty metrics lead to an average of 6.8% relative gains on AUPRC across various long-form generation settings, and our end-to-end system provides consistent 2-4% gains in factuality over existing decoding techniques while significantly improving the informativeness of generated responses.17f:T635,Large Multimodal Model (LMM) is a hot research topic in the computer vision area and has also demonstrated remarkable potential across multiple disciplinary fields. A recent trend is to further extend and enhance the perception capabilities of LMMs. The current methods follow the paradigm of adapting the visual task outputs to the format of the language model, which is the main component of a LMM. This adaptation leads to convenient development of such LMMs with minimal modifications, however, it overlooks the intrinsic characteristics of diverse visual tasks and hinders the learning of perception capabilities. To address this issue, we propose a novel LMM architecture named Lumen, a Large multimodal model with versatile vision-centric capability enhancement. We decouple the LMM's learning of perception capabilities into task-agnostic and task-specific stages. Lumen first promotes fine-grained vision-language concept alignment, which is the fundamental capability for various visual tasks. Thus the output of the task-agnostic stage is a shared representation for all the tasks we address in this paper. Then the task-specific decoding is carried out by flexibly routing the shared representation to lightweight task decoders with negligible training efforts. Comprehensive experimental results on a series of vision-centric and VQA benchmarks indicate that our Lumen model not only achieves or surpasses the performance of existing LMM-based approaches in a range of vision-centric tasks while maintaining general visual understanding and instruction following capabilities.180:T5e9,Large language models (LLMs) inevitably memorize sensitive, copyrighted, and harmful knowledge from the training corpus; therefore, it is crucial to erase this knowledge from the models. Machine unlearning is a promising solution for efficiently removing specific knowledge by post hoc modifying models. In this paper, we propose a Real-World Knowledge Unlearning benchmark (RWKU) for LLM unlearning. RWKU is designed based on the following three key factors: (1) For the task setting, we consider a more practical and challenging unlearning setting, where neither the forget corpus nor the retain corpus is accessible. (2) For the knowledge source, we choose 200 real-world famous people as the unlearning targets and show that such popular knowledge is widely present in various LLMs. (3) For the evaluation framework, we design the forget set and the retain set to evaluate the model’s capabilities across various real-world applications. Regarding the forget set, we provide four four membership inference attack (MIA) methods and nine kinds of adversarial attack probes to rigorously test unlearning efficacy. Regarding the retain set, we assess locality and utility in terms of neighbor perturbation, general ability, reasoning ability, truthfulness, factuality, and fluency. We conduct extensive experiments across two unlearning scenarios, two models and six baseline methods and obtain some meaningful findings. We release our benchmark and code publicly at http://rwku-bench.github.io for future work.181:T4bc,With the continuous advancement of large language models (LLMs), it is essential to create new benchmarks to effectively evaluate their expanding capabilities and identify areas for improvement. This work focuses on multi-image reasoning, an emerging capability in state-of-the-art LLMs. We introduce ReMI, a dataset designed to assess LLMs' ability to Reason with Multiple Images. This dataset encompasses a diverse range of tasks, spanning various reasoning domains such as math, physics, logic, code, table/chart understanding, and spatial and temporal reasoning. It also covers a broad spectrum of characteristics found in multi-image reasoning scenarios. We have benchmarked several cutting-edge LLMs using ReMI and found a substantial gap between their performance and human-level proficiency. This highlights the challenges in multi-image reasoning and the need for further research. Our analysis also reveals the strengths and weaknesses of different models, shedding light on the types of reasoning that are currently attainable and areas where future models require improvement. To foster further research in this area, we are releasing ReMI publicly: https://huggingface.co/datasets/mehrankazemi/ReMI.182:T7d0,The immense parameter scale of large language models underscores the necessity for parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods. Methods based on Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) assume the low-rank characteristics of the incremental matrix and optimize the matrix obtained from low-rank decomposition. Although effective, these methods are constrained by a fixed and unalterable rank, neglecting the variable importance of matrices. Consequently, methods for adaptive rank allocation are proposed, among which AdaLoRA demonstrates excellent fine-tuning performance. AdaLoRA conducts adaptation based on singular value decomposition (SVD), dynamically allocating ranks according to importance. However, it still struggles to achieve a balance between fine-tuning effectiveness and efficiency, leading to limited rank allocation space. Additionally, the importance measurement focuses only on parameters with minimal impact on the loss, neglecting the dominant role of singular values in SVD-based matrices and the fluctuations during training. To address these issues, we propose SalientLoRA, which unveils the intrinsic ranks of the weight matrix via salience measurement and adaptively optimizes ranks of LoRA. This method measures the salience of rank within a time-series by constructing inter-dependencies among the correlations of singular values and prune ranks with low salience while retaining those with high significance. Additionally, an adaptive adjustment of the time-series window enhances the speed of rank allocation while ensuring training stability. This mechanism enables matrics to set a higher initial rank, thus expanding the allocation space for ranks. To evaluate the generality of our method across various tasks, we conduct experiments on natural language understanding (NLU), natural language generation (NLG), and large model instruction tuning tasks. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of SalientLoRA, which outperforms state-of-the-art methods by 0.96%-3.56% on mult183:T60c,The ability to compare objects, scenes, or situations is crucial for effective decision-making and problem-solving in everyday life. For instance, comparing the freshness of apples enables better choices during grocery shopping while comparing sofa designs helps optimize the aesthetics of our living space. Despite its significance, the comparative capability is largely unexplored in artificial general intelligence (AGI). In this paper, we introduce MLLM-CompBench, a benchmark designed to evaluate the comparative reasoning capability of multimodal large language models (MLLMs). MLLM-CompBench mines and pairs images through visually oriented questions covering eight dimensions of relative comparison: visual attribute, existence, state, emotion, temporality, spatiality, quantity, and quality. We curate a collection of around 40K image pairs using metadata from diverse vision datasets and CLIP similarity scores. These image pairs span a broad array of visual domains, including animals, fashion, sports, and both outdoor and indoor scenes. The questions are carefully crafted to discern relative characteristics between two images and are labeled by human annotators for accuracy and relevance. We use MLLM-CompBench to evaluate recent MLLMs, including GPT-4V(ision), Gemini-Pro, and LLaVA-1.6. Our results reveal notable shortcomings in their comparative abilities. We believe MLLM-COMPBENCH not only sheds light on these limitations but also establishes a solid foundation for future enhancements in the comparative capability of MLLMs.184:T554,Training diffusion models for audiovisual sequences allows for a range of generation tasks by learning conditional distributions of various input-output combinations of the two modalities. Nevertheless, this strategy often requires training a separate model for each task which is expensive. Here, we propose a novel training approach to effectively learn arbitrary conditional distributions in the audiovisual space. Our key contribution lies in how we parameterize the diffusion timestep in the forward diffusion process. Instead of the standard fixed diffusion timestep, we propose applying variable diffusion timesteps across the temporal dimension and across modalities of the inputs. This formulation offers flexibility to introduce variable noise levels for various portions of the input, hence the term mixture of noise levels. We propose a transformer-based audiovisual latent diffusion model and show that it can be trained in a task-agnostic fashion using our approach to enable a variety of audiovisual generation tasks at inference time. Experiments demonstrate the versatility of our method in tackling cross-modal and multimodal interpolation tasks in the audiovisual space. Notably, our proposed approach surpasses baselines in generating temporally and perceptually consistent samples conditioned on the input. Project page: neurips13025.github.io185:T4a2,As the scale of data and models for video understanding rapidly expand, handling long-form video input in transformer-based models presents a practical challenge. Rather than resorting to input sampling or token dropping, which may result in information loss, token merging shows promising results when used in collaboration with transformers. However, the application of token merging for long-form video processing is not trivial. We begin with the premise that token merging should not rely solely on the similarity of video tokens; the saliency of tokens should also be considered. To address this, we explore various video token merging strategies for long-form video classification, starting with a simple extension of image token merging, moving to region-concentrated merging, and finally proposing a learnable video token merging (VTM) algorithm that dynamically merges tokens based on their saliency. Extensive experimental results show that we achieve better or comparable performances on the LVU, COIN, and Breakfast datasets. Moreover, our approach significantly reduces memory costs by 84% and boosts throughput by approximately 6.89 times compared to baseline algorithms.186:T677,Visual-Language Alignment (VLA) has gained a lot of attention since CLIP's groundbreaking work. Although CLIP performs well, the typical direct latent feature alignment lacks clarity in its representation and similarity scores. On the other hand, lexical representation, a vector whose element represents the similarity between the sample and a word from the vocabulary, is a natural sparse representation and interpretable, providing exact matches for individual words. However, lexical representations are difficult to learn due to no ground-truth supervision and false-discovery issues, and thus requires complex design to train effectively. In this paper, we introduce LexVLA, a more interpretable VLA framework by learning a unified lexical representation for both modalities without complex design. We use DINOv2 as our visual model for its local-inclined features and Llama 2, a generative language model, to leverage its in-context lexical prediction ability. To avoid the false discovery, we propose an overuse penalty to refrain the lexical representation from falsely frequently activating meaningless words. We demonstrate that these two pre-trained uni-modal models can be well-aligned by fine-tuning on the modest multi-modal dataset and avoid intricate training configurations. On cross-modal retrieval benchmarks, LexVLA, trained on the CC-12M multi-modal dataset, outperforms baselines fine-tuned on larger datasets (e.g., YFCC15M) and those trained from scratch on even bigger datasets (e.g., 1.1B data, including CC-12M). We conduct extensive experiments to analyze LexVLA. Codes are available at https://github.com/Clementine24/LexVLA.187:T614,Autonomous agents that control computer interfaces to accomplish human tasks are emerging. Leveraging LLMs to power such agents has been of special interest, but unless fine-tuned on human-collected task demonstrations, performance is still relatively low. In this work we study whether fine-tuning alone is a viable approach for building real-world computer control agents. In particularly, we investigate how performance measured on both high and low-level tasks in domain and out of domain scales as more training data is collected. To this end we collect and release a new dataset, AndroidControl, consisting of 15,283 demonstrations of everyday tasks with Android apps. Compared to existing datasets, each AndroidControl task instance includes both high and low-level human-generated instructions, allowing us to explore the level of task complexity an agent can handle. Moreover, AndroidControl is the most diverse computer control dataset to date, including 14,548 unique tasks over 833 Android apps, thus allowing us to conduct in-depth analysis of the model performance in and out of the domain of the training data. Using the dataset, we find that when tested in domain fine-tuned models outperform zero and few-shot baselines and scale in such a way that robust performance might feasibly be obtained simply by collecting more data. Out of domain, performance scales significantly more slowly and suggests that in particular for high-level tasks, fine-tuning on more data alone may be insufficient for achieving robust out-of-domain performance.188:T606,In this paper, we present DSA, the first automated framework for discovering sparsity allocation schemes for layer-wise pruning in Large Language Models (LLMs). LLMs have become increasingly powerful, but their large parameter counts make them computationally expensive. Existing pruning methods for compressing LLMs primarily focus on evaluating redundancies and removing element-wise weights. However, these methods fail to allocate adaptive layer-wise sparsities, leading to performance degradation in challenging tasks. We observe that per-layer importance statistics can serve as allocation indications, but their effectiveness depends on the allocation function between layers. To address this issue, we develop an expression discovery framework to explore potential allocation strategies. Our allocation functions involve two steps: reducing element-wise metrics to per-layer importance scores, and modelling layer importance to sparsity ratios. To search for the most effective allocation function, we construct a search space consisting of pre-process, reduction, transform, and post-process operations. We leverage an evolutionary algorithm to perform crossover and mutation on superior candidates within the population, guided by performance evaluation. Finally, we seamlessly integrate our discovered functions into various uniform methods, resulting in significant performance improvements. We conduct extensive experiments on multiple challenging tasks such as arithmetic, knowledge reasoning, and multimodal benchmarks spanning189:T6cc,Recent advancements in image understanding have benefited from the extensive use of web image-text pairs. However, video understanding remains a challenge despite the availability of substantial web video-text data. This difficulty primarily arises from the inherent complexity of videos and the inefficient language supervision in recent web-collected video-text datasets. In this paper, we introduce Text-Only Pre-Alignment (TOPA), a novel approach to extend large language models (LLMs) for video understanding, without the need for pre-training on real video data. Specifically, we first employ an advanced LLM to automatically generate Textual Videos comprising continuous textual frames, along with corresponding annotations to simulate real video-text data. Then, these annotated textual videos are used to pre-align a language-only LLM with the video modality. To bridge the gap between textual and real videos, we employ the CLIP model as the feature extractor to align image and text modalities. During text-only pre-alignment, the continuous textual frames, encoded as a sequence of CLIP text features, are analogous to continuous CLIP image features, thus aligning the LLM with real video representation. Extensive experiments, including zero-shot evaluation and finetuning on various video understanding tasks, demonstrate that TOPA is an effective and efficient framework for aligning video content with LLMs. In particular, without training on any video data, the TOPA-Llama2-13B model achieves a Top-1 accuracy of 51.0% on the challenging long-form video understanding benchmark, Egoschema. This performance surpasses previous video-text pre-training approaches and proves competitive with recent GPT-3.5-based video agents.18a:T4e8,As the adoption of large language models increases and the need for per-user or per-task model customization grows, the parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods, such as low-rank adaptation (LoRA) and its variants, incur substantial storage and transmission costs. To further reduce stored parameters, we introduce a"divide-and-share"paradigm that breaks the barriers of low-rank decomposition across matrix dimensions, modules, and layers by sharing parameters globally via a vector bank. As an instantiation of the paradigm to LoRA, our proposed VB-LoRA composites all the low-rank matrices of LoRA from a shared vector bank with a differentiable top-k admixture module. VB-LoRA achieves extreme parameter efficiency while maintaining comparable or better performance compared to state-of-the-art PEFT methods. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of VB-LoRA on natural language understanding, natural language generation, instruction tuning, and mathematical reasoning tasks. When fine-tuning the Llama2-13B model, VB-LoRA only uses 0.4% of LoRA's stored parameters, yet achieves superior results. Our source code is available at https://github.com/leo-yangli/VB-LoRA. This method has been merged into the Hugging Face PEFT package.18b:T776,In this paper, we point out that suboptimal noise-data mapping leads to slow training of diffusion models. During diffusion training, current methods diffuse each image across the entire noise space, resulting in a mixture of all images at every point in the noise layer. We emphasize that this random mixture of noise-data mapping complicates the optimization of the denoising function in diffusion models. Drawing inspiration from the immiscibility phenomenon in physics, we propose Immiscible Diffusion, a simple and effective method to improve the random mixture of noise-data mapping. In physics, miscibility can vary according to various intermolecular forces. Thus, immiscibility means that the mixing of molecular sources is distinguishable. Inspired by this concept, we propose an assignment-then-diffusion training strategy to achieve Immiscible Diffusion. As one example, prior to diffusing the image data into noise, we assign diffusion target noise for the image data by minimizing the total image-noise pair distance in a mini-batch. The assignment functions analogously to external forces to expel the diffuse-able areas of images, thus mitigating the inherent difficulties in diffusion training. Our approach is remarkably simple, requiring only one line of code to restrict the diffuse-able area for each image while preserving the Gaussian distribution of noise. In this way, each image is preferably projected to nearby noise. Experiments demonstrate that our method can achieve up to 3x faster training for unconditional Consistency Models on the CIFAR dataset, as well as for DDIM and Stable Diffusion on CelebA and ImageNet dataset, and in class-conditional training and fine-tuning. In addition, we conducted a thorough analysis that sheds light on how it improves diffusion training speed while improving fidelity. The code is available at https://yhli123.github.io/immiscible-diffusion18c:T70d,Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized the field of natural language processing with their impressive capabilities. However, their enormous size presents challenges for deploying them in real-world applications. Traditional compression techniques, like pruning, often lead to suboptimal performance due to their uniform pruning ratios and lack of consideration for the varying importance of features across different layers. To address these limitations, we present a novel Adaptive Layer Sparsity (ALS) approach to optimize LLMs. Our approach consists of two key steps. Firstly, we estimate the correlation matrix between intermediate layers by leveraging the concept of information orthogonality. This novel perspective allows for a precise measurement of the importance of each layer across the model. Secondly, we employ a linear optimization algorithm to develop an adaptive sparse allocation strategy based on evaluating the correlation matrix. This strategy enables us to selectively prune features in intermediate layers, achieving fine-grained optimization of the LLM model. Considering the varying importance across different layers, we can significantly reduce the model size without sacrificing performance. We conduct extensive experiments on publicly available language processing datasets, including the LLaMA-V1|V2|V3 family and OPT, covering various benchmarks. Our experimental results validate the effectiveness of our ALS method, showcasing its superiority over previous approaches. The performance gains demonstrate its potential for enhancing LLMs’ efficiency and resource utilization. Notably, our approach surpasses the state-of-the-art models Wanda and SparseGPT, showcasing its ability to excel even under high sparsity levels. Codes at: https://github.com/lliai/ALS.18d:T5a6,Model editing has become an increasingly popular alternative for efficiently updating knowledge within language models. 
Current methods mainly focus on reliability, generalization, and locality,  with many methods excelling across these criteria. 
Some recent works disclose the pitfalls of these editing methods such as knowledge distortion or conflict. However, the general abilities of post-edited language models remain unexplored. 
In this paper, we perform a comprehensive evaluation on various editing methods and different language models, and have following findings.
(1) Existing editing methods lead to inevitable performance deterioration on general benchmarks, indicating that existing editing methods maintain the general abilities of the model within only a few dozen edits.
When the number of edits is slightly large, the intrinsic knowledge structure of the model is disrupted or even completely damaged. 
(2) Instruction-tuned models are more robust to editing, showing less performance drop on general knowledge after editing. 
(3) Language model with large scale is more resistant to editing compared to small model.
(4) The safety of the edited model, is significantly weakened, even for those safety-aligned models.
Our findings indicate that current editing methods are only suitable for small-scale knowledge updates within language models, which motivates further research on more practical and reliable editing methods.18e:T657,Recent research has shown that Transformers with linear attention are capable of in-context learning (ICL) by implementing a linear estimator through gradient descent steps. However, the existing results on the optimization landscape apply under stylized settings where task and feature vectors are assumed to be IID and the attention weights are fully parameterized. In this work, we develop a stronger characterization of the optimization and generalization landscape of ICL through contributions on architectures, low-rank parameterization, and correlated designs: (1) We study the landscape of 1-layer linear attention and 1-layer H3, a state-space model. Under a suitable correlated design assumption, we prove that both implement 1-step preconditioned gradient descent. We show that thanks to its native convolution filters, H3 also has the advantage of implementing sample weighting and outperforming linear attention in suitable settings. (2) By studying correlated designs, we provide new risk bounds for retrieval augmented generation (RAG) and task-feature alignment which reveal how ICL sample complexity benefits from distributional alignment. (3) We derive the optimal risk for low-rank parameterized attention weights in terms of covariance spectrum. Through this, we also shed light on how LoRA can adapt to a new distribution by capturing the shift between task covariances. Experimental results corroborate our theoretical findings. Overall, this work explores the optimization and risk landscape of ICL in practically meaningful settings and contributes to a more thorough understanding of its mechanics.18f:T572,Our work tackles the computational challenges of contrastive learning methods, particularly for the pretraining of Vision Transformers (ViTs). Despite the effectiveness of contrastive learning, the substantial computational resources required for training often hinder their practical application. To mitigate this issue, we propose an acceleration framework, leveraging ViT's unique ability to generalize across inputs of varying sequence lengths. Our method employs a mix of sequence compression strategies, including randomized token dropout and flexible patch scaling, to reduce the cost of gradient estimation and accelerate convergence. We further provide an in-depth analysis of the gradient estimation error of various acceleration strategies as well as their impact on downstream tasks, offering valuable insights into the trade-offs between acceleration and performance. 
    We also propose a novel procedure to identify an optimal acceleration schedule to adjust the sequence compression ratios to the training progress, ensuring efficient training without sacrificing downstream performance. Our approach significantly reduces computational overhead across various self-supervised learning algorithms on large-scale datasets. In ImageNet, our method achieves speedups of 4$\times$ in MoCo, 3.3$\times$ in SimCLR, and 2.5$\times$ in DINO, demonstrating substantial efficiency gains.190:T577,Popular parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods, such as LoRA and its variants, freeze pre-trained model weights $\(\mathbf{W}\)$ and inject learnable matrices $\(\mathbf{\Delta W}\)$. These $\(\mathbf{\Delta W}\)$ matrices are structured for efficient parameterization, often using techniques like low-rank approximations or scaling vectors. However, these methods typically exhibit a performance gap compared to full fine-tuning. While recent PEFT methods have narrowed this gap, they do so at the expense of additional learnable parameters. We propose SVFT, a *simple* approach that structures $\(\mathbf{\Delta W}\)$ based on the specific weight matrix $\(\mathbf{W}\)$. SVFT updates $\(\mathbf{W}\)$ as a sparse combination $\(M\)$ of outer products of its singular vectors, training only the coefficients of these combinations. Crucially, we make additional off-diagonal elements in $M$ learnable, enabling a smooth trade-off between trainable parameters and expressivity—an aspect that distinctly sets our approach apart from previous works leveraging singular values. Extensive experiments on language and vision benchmarks show that SVFT recovers up to **96%** of full fine-tuning performance while training only **0.006 to 0.25%** of parameters, outperforming existing methods that achieve only up to **{85\%}** performance with **0.03 to 0.8%** of the trainable parameter budget.191:T738,Neural networks are often trained on multiple tasks, either simultaneously (multi-task learning, MTL) or sequentially (pretraining and subsequent finetuning, PT+FT). In particular, it is common practice to pretrain neural networks on a large auxiliary task before finetuning on a downstream task with fewer samples. Despite the prevalence of this approach, the inductive biases that arise from learning multiple tasks are poorly characterized. In this work, we address this gap. We describe novel implicit regularization penalties associated with MTL and PT+FT in diagonal linear networks and single-hidden-layer ReLU networks. These penalties indicate that MTL and PT+FT induce the network to reuse features in different ways. 1) Both MTL and PT+FT exhibit biases towards feature reuse between tasks, and towards sparsity in the set of learned features. We show a "conservation law" that implies a direct tradeoff between these two biases. 2) PT+FT exhibits a novel "nested feature selection" regime, not described by either the "lazy" or "rich" regimes identified in prior work, which biases it to *rely on a sparse subset* of the features learned during pretraining. This regime is much narrower for MTL. 3) PT+FT (but not MTL) in ReLU networks benefits from features that are correlated between the auxiliary and main task. We confirm these findings empirically with teacher-student models, and introduce a technique -- weight rescaling following pretraining -- that can elicit the nested feature selection regime. Finally, we validate our theory in deep neural networks trained on image classification. We find that weight rescaling improves performance when it causes models to display signatures of nested feature selection. Our results suggest that nested feature selection may be an important inductive bias for finetuning neural networks.192:T557,Two competing paradigms exist for self-supervised learning of data representations. 
    Joint Embedding Predictive Architectures (JEPAs) is a class of architectures in which semantically similar inputs are encoded into representations that are predictive of each other. A recent successful approach that falls under the JEPA framework is self-distillation, where an online encoder is trained to predict the output of the target encoder, sometimes with a lightweight predictor network. This is contrasted with the Masked Auto Encoder (MAE) paradigm, where an encoder and decoder are trained to reconstruct missing parts of the input in ambient space rather than its latent representation. A common motivation for using the JEPA approach over MAE is that the JEPA objective prioritizes abstract features over fine-grained pixel information (which can be unpredictable and uninformative).
    In this work, we seek to understand the mechanism behind this empirical observation by analyzing deep linear models. We uncover a surprising mechanism: in a simplified linear setting where both approaches learn similar representations, JEPAs are biased to learn high influence features, or features characterized by having high regression coefficients. Our results point to a distinct implicit bias of predicting in latent space that may shed light on its success in practice.193:T586,We study the fundamental problem of sequential probability assignment, also known as online learning with logarithmic loss, with respect to an arbitrary, possibly nonparametric hypothesis class. Our goal is to obtain a complexity measure for the hypothesis class that characterizes the minimax regret and to determine a general, minimax optimal algorithm. Notably, the sequential $\ell_{\infty}$ entropy, extensively studied in the literature (Rakhlin and Sridharan, 2015, Bilodeau et al., 2020, Wu et al., 2023), was shown to not characterize minimax regret in general. Inspired by the seminal work of Shtarkov (1987)
    and Rakhlin, Sridharan, and Tewari (2010), we introduce a novel complexity measure, the \emph{contextual Shtarkov sum}, corresponding to the Shtarkov sum after projection onto a multiary context tree, and show that the worst case log contextual Shtarkov sum equals the minimax regret. Using the contextual Shtarkov sum, we derive the minimax optimal strategy, dubbed \emph{contextual Normalized Maximum Likelihood} (cNML). Our results hold for sequential experts, beyond binary labels, which are settings rarely considered in prior work. 
    To illustrate the utility of this characterization, we provide a short proof of a new regret upper bound in terms of sequential $\ell_{\infty}$ entropy, unifying and sharpening state-of-the-art bounds by Bilodeau et al. (2020) and Wu et al. (2023).194:T736,Generating natural and meaningful responses to communicate with multi-modal human inputs is a fundamental capability of Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs). While current open-source LVLMs demonstrate promising performance in simplified scenarios such as single-turn single-image input, they fall short in real-world conversation scenarios such as following instructions in a long context history with multi-turn and multi-images. Existing LVLM benchmarks primarily focus on single-choice questions or short-form responses, which do not adequately assess the capabilities of LVLMs in real-world human-AI interaction applications. Therefore, we introduce MMDU, a comprehensive benchmark, and MMDU-45k, a large-scale instruction tuning dataset, designed to evaluate and improve LVLMs' abilities in multi-turn and multi-image conversations. We employ the clustering algorithm to find the relevant images and textual descriptions from the open-source Wikipedia and construct the question-answer pairs by human annotators with the assistance of the GPT-4o model.
MMDU has a maximum of 18k image+text tokens, 20 images, and 27 turns, which is at least 5x longer than previous benchmarks and poses challenges to current LVLMs. Our in-depth analysis of 15 representative LVLMs using MMDU reveals that open-source LVLMs lag behind closed-source counterparts due to limited conversational instruction tuning data.
We demonstrate that fine-tuning open-source LVLMs on MMDU-45k significantly address this gap, generating longer and more accurate conversations, and improving scores on MMDU and existing benchmarks (MMStar: +1.1%, MathVista: +1.5%, ChartQA: +1.2%). Our contributions pave the way for bridging the gap between current LVLM models and real-world application demands. The links to MMDU, and MMDU-45k are available in the supplementary material.195:T550,Finetuning foundation models for specific tasks is an emerging paradigm in modern machine learning. The efficacy of task-specific finetuning largely depends on the selection of appropriate training data. We present TSDS (Task-Specific Data Selection), a framework to select data for task-specific model finetuning, guided by a small but representative set of examples from the target task. To do so, we formulate data selection for task-specific finetuning as an optimization problem with a distribution alignment loss based on optimal transport to capture the discrepancy between the selected data and the target distribution. In addition, we add a regularizer to encourage the diversity of the selected data and incorporate kernel density estimation into the regularizer to reduce the negative effects of near-duplicates among the candidate data.
We connect our optimization problem to nearest neighbor search and design efficient algorithms to compute the optimal solution based on approximate nearest neighbor search techniques.
We evaluate our method on data selection for both continued pretraining and instruction tuning of language models.
We show that instruction tuning using data selected by our method with a 1\% selection ratio often outperforms using the full dataset and beats the baseline selection methods by 1.5 points in F1 score on average.196:T586,In the era of large language models, model merging is a promising way to combine multiple task-specific models into a single multitask model without extra training. 
However, two challenges remain: (a) interference between different models and (b) heterogeneous data during testing. Traditional model merging methods often show significant performance gaps compared to fine-tuned models due to these issues. 
Additionally, a one-size-fits-all model lacks flexibility for diverse test data, leading to performance degradation. 
We show that both shared and exclusive task-specific knowledge are crucial for merging performance, but directly merging exclusive knowledge hinders overall performance. 
In view of this, we propose Twin-Merging, a method that encompasses two principal stages: 
(1) modularizing knowledge into shared and exclusive components, with compression to reduce redundancy and enhance efficiency; 
(2) dynamically merging shared and task-specific knowledge based on the input. 
This approach narrows the performance gap between merged and fine-tuned models and improves adaptability to heterogeneous data. 
Extensive experiments on $20$ datasets for both language and vision tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, showing an average improvement of $28.34\%$ in absolute normalized score for discriminative tasks and even surpassing the fine-tuned upper bound on the generative tasks.197:T4b7,Recent breakthroughs in vision-language models (VLMs) emphasize the necessity of benchmarking human preferences in real-world multimodal interactions. To address this gap, we launched WildVision-Arena (WV-Arena), an online platform that collects human preferences to evaluate VLMs. We curated WV-Bench by selecting 500 high-quality samples from 8,000 user submissions in WV-Arena. WV-Bench uses GPT-4 as the judge to compare each VLM with Claude-3-Sonnet, achieving a Spearman correlation of 0.94 with the WV-Arena Elo. This significantly outperforms other benchmarks like MMVet, MMMU, and MMStar.

Our comprehensive analysis of 20K real-world interactions reveals important insights into the failure cases of top-performing VLMs. For example, we find that although GPT-4V surpasses many other models like Reka-Flash, Opus, and Yi-VL-Plus in simple visual recognition and reasoning tasks, it still faces challenges with subtle contextual cues, spatial reasoning, visual imagination, and expert domain knowledge. Additionally, current VLMs exhibit issues with hallucinations and safety when intentionally provoked. We are releasing our chat and feedback data to further advance research in the field of VLMs.198:T4ea,Recent work on pruning large language models (LLMs) has shown that one can eliminate a large number of parameters without compromising performance, making pruning a promising strategy to reduce LLM model size. Existing LLM pruning strategies typically assign uniform pruning ratios across layers, limiting overall pruning ability; and recent work on layerwise pruning of LLMs is often based on heuristics that can easily lead to suboptimal performance. In this paper, we leverage Heavy-Tailed Self-Regularization (HT-SR) Theory, in particular the shape of empirical spectral densities (ESDs) of weight matrices, to design improved layerwise pruning ratios for LLMs. Our analysis reveals a wide variability in how well-trained, and thus relatedly how prunable, different layers of an LLM are. Based on this, we propose AlphaPruning, which uses shape metrics to allocate layerwise sparsity ratios in a more theoretically principled manner. AlphaPruning can be used in conjunction with multiple existing LLM pruning methods. Our empirical results show that AlphaPruning prunes LLaMA-7B to 80% sparsity while maintaining reasonable perplexity, marking a first in the literature on LLMs. We have open-sourced our code at https://github.com/haiquanlu/AlphaPruning.199:T683,Despite their strong performances on many generative tasks, diffusion models require a large number of sampling steps in order to generate realistic samples. This has motivated the community to develop effective methods to distill pre-trained diffusion models into more efficient models, but these methods still typically require few-step inference or perform substantially worse than the underlying model. In this paper, we present Score Implicit Matching (SIM) a new approach to distilling pre-trained diffusion models into single-step generator models, while maintaining almost the same sample generation ability as the original model as well as being data-free with no need of training samples for distillation. The method rests upon the fact that, although the traditional score-based loss is intractable to minimize for generator models, under certain conditions we can efficiently compute the gradients for a wide class of score-based divergences between a diffusion model and a generator. SIM shows strong empirical performances for one-step generators: on the CIFAR10 dataset, it achieves an FID of 2.06 for unconditional generation and 1.96 for class-conditional generation. Moreover, by applying SIM to a leading transformer-based diffusion model, we distill a single-step generator for text-to-image (T2I) generation that attains an aesthetic score of 6.42 with no performance decline over the original multi-step counterpart, clearly outperforming the other one-step generators including SDXL-TURBO of 5.33, SDXL-LIGHTNING of 5.34 and HYPER-SDXL of 5.85. We will release this industry-ready one-step transformer-based T2I generator along with this paper.19a:T58d,Although Large Visual Language Models (LVLMs) have demonstrated exceptional abilities in understanding multimodal data, they invariably suffer from hallucinations, leading to a disconnect between the generated text and the corresponding images. Almost all current visual contrastive decoding methods attempt to mitigate these hallucinations by introducing visual uncertainty information that appropriately widens the contrastive logits gap between hallucinatory and targeted ones. However, due to uncontrollable nature of the global visual uncertainty, they struggle to precisely induce the hallucinatory tokens, which severely limits their effectiveness in mitigating hallucinations and may even lead to the generation of undesired hallucinations. To tackle this issue, we conducted the theoretical analysis to promote the effectiveness of contrast decoding. Building on this insight, we introduce a novel optimization strategy named Hallucination-Induced Optimization (HIO). This strategy seeks to amplify the contrast between hallucinatory and targeted tokens relying on a fine-tuned theoretical preference model (i.e., Contrary Bradley-Terry Model), thereby facilitating efficient contrast decoding to alleviate hallucinations in LVLMs. Extensive experimental research demonstrates that our HIO strategy can effectively reduce hallucinations in LVLMs, outperforming state-of-the-art methods across various benchmarks.19b:T5f7,Fine-tuning is arguably the most straightforward way to tailor a pre-trained model (e.g., a foundation model) to downstream applications, but it also comes with the risk of losing valuable knowledge the model had learned in pre-training. For example, fine-tuning a pre-trained classifier capable of recognizing a large number of classes to master a subset of classes at hand is shown to drastically degrade the model's accuracy in the other classes it had previously learned. As such, it is hard to further use the fine-tuned model when it encounters classes beyond the fine-tuning data. In this paper, we systematically dissect the issue, aiming to answer the fundamental question, "What has been damaged in the fine-tuned model?" To our surprise, we find that the fine-tuned model neither forgets the relationship among the other classes nor degrades the features to recognize these classes. Instead, the fine-tuned model often produces more discriminative features for these other classes, even if they were missing during fine-tuning! What really hurts the accuracy is the discrepant logit scales between the fine-tuning classes and the other classes, implying that a simple post-processing calibration would bring back the pre-trained model's capability and at the same time unveil the feature improvement over all classes. We conduct an extensive empirical study to demonstrate the robustness of our findings and provide preliminary explanations underlying them, suggesting new directions for future theoretical analysis.19c:T681,The development of generative language models that can create long and coherent textual outputs via autoregression has lead to a proliferation of uses and a corresponding sweep of analyses as researches work to determine the limitations of this new paradigm. Unlike humans, these '*Large Language Models*' (LLMs) are highly sensitive to small changes in their inputs, leading to unwanted inconsistency in their behavior. One problematic inconsistency when LLMs are used to answer multiple-choice questions or analyze multiple inputs is *order dependency*: the output of an LLM can (and often does) change significantly when sub-sequences are swapped, despite both orderings being semantically identical. In this paper we present , a technique that *guarantees* the output of an LLM will not have order dependence on a specified set of sub-sequences. We show that this method *provably* eliminates order dependency, and that it can be applied to *any* transformer-based LLM to enable text generation that is unaffected by re-orderings. Delving into the implications of our method, we show that, despite our inputs being out of distribution, the impact on expected accuracy is small, where the expectation is over the order of uniformly chosen shuffling of the candidate responses, and usually significantly less in practice. Thus, can be used as a '*dropped-in*' method on fully trained models. Finally, we discuss how our method's success suggests that other strong guarantees can be obtained on LLM performance via modifying the input representations.

Code is available at [github.com/reidmcy/set-based-prompting](https://github.com/reidmcy/set-based-prompting.).19d:T705,Reinforcement learning (RL) is inherently rife with non-stationarity since the states and rewards the agent observes during training depend on its changing policy.
Therefore, networks in deep RL must be capable of adapting to new observations and fitting new targets.
However, previous works have observed that networks trained under non-stationarity exhibit an inability to continue learning, termed loss of plasticity, and eventually a collapse in performance.
For off-policy deep value-based RL methods, this phenomenon has been correlated with a decrease in representation rank and the ability to fit random targets, termed capacity loss.
Although this correlation has generally been attributed to neural network learning under non-stationarity, the connection to representation dynamics has not been carefully studied in on-policy policy optimization methods.
In this work, we empirically study representation dynamics in Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) on the Atari and MuJoCo environments, revealing that PPO agents are also affected by feature rank deterioration and capacity loss.
We show that this is aggravated by stronger non-stationarity, ultimately driving the actor's performance to collapse, regardless of the performance of the critic.
We ask why the trust region, specific to methods like PPO, cannot alleviate or prevent the collapse and find a connection between representation collapse and the degradation of the trust region, one exacerbating the other.
Finally, we present Proximal Feature Optimization (PFO), a novel auxiliary loss that, along with other interventions, shows that regularizing the representation dynamics mitigates the performance collapse of PPO agents.
Code and run histories are available at https://github.com/CLAIRE-Labo/no-representation-no-trust.19e:T789,Model editing is a growing area of research that is particularly valuable in contexts where modifying key model components, like neurons or filters, can significantly impact the model’s performance. The key challenge lies in identifying important components useful to the model’s predictions. We apply model editing to address two active areas of research, Structured Pruning, and Selective Class Forgetting. In this work, we adopt a distributional approach to the problem of identifying important components, leveraging the recently proposed discriminative filters hypothesis, which states that well-trained (convolutional) models possess discriminative filters that are essential to prediction. To do so, we define discriminative ability in terms of the Bayes error rate associated with the feature distributions, which is equivalent to computing the Total Variation (TV) distance between the distributions. However, computing the TV distance is intractable, motivating us to derive novel witness function-based lower bounds on the TV distance that require no assumptions on the underlying distributions; using this bound generalizes prior work such as Murti et al. [39] that relied on unrealistic Gaussianity assumptions on the feature distributions. With these bounds, we are able to discover critical subnetworks responsible for classwise predictions, and derive DISCEDIT-SP and DISCEDIT-U , algorithms for structured pruning requiring no access to the training data and loss function, and selective forgetting respectively. We apply DISCEDIT-U to selective class forgetting on models trained on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100, and we show that on average, we can reduce accuracy on a single class by over 80% with a minimal reduction in test accuracy on the remaining classes. Similarly, on Structured pruning problems, we obtain 40.8% sparsity on ResNet50 on Imagenet, with only a 2.6% drop in accuracy with minimal fine-tuning.19f:T5c3,Large language models (LLMs) often lack culture-specific everyday knowledge, especially across diverse regions and non-English languages. Existing benchmarks for evaluating LLMs' cultural sensitivities are usually limited to a single language or online sources like Wikipedia, which may not reflect the daily habits, customs, and lifestyles of different regions. That is, information about the food people eat for their birthday celebrations, spices they typically use, musical instruments youngsters play or the sports they practice in school is not always explicitly written online. To address this issue, we introduce BLEnD, a hand-crafted benchmark designed to evaluate LLMs' everyday knowledge across diverse cultures and languages. The benchmark comprises 52.6k question-answer pairs from 16 countries/regions, in 13 different languages, including low-resource ones such as Amharic, Assamese, Azerbaijani, Hausa, and Sundanese. We evaluate LLMs in two formats: short-answer questions, and multiple-choice questions. We show that LLMs perform better in cultures that are more present online, with a maximum 57.34% difference in GPT-4, the best-performing model, in the short-answer format.
Furthermore, we find that LLMs perform better in their local languages for mid-to-high-resource languages. Interestingly, for languages deemed to be low-resource, LLMs provide better answers in English. We make our dataset publicly available at: https://github.com/nlee0212/BLEnD.1a0:T6fd,Massive web-crawled image-text datasets lay the foundation for recent progress in multimodal learning. These datasets are designed with the goal of training a model to do well on standard computer vision benchmarks, many of which, however, have been shown to be English-centric (e.g., ImageNet). Consequently, existing data curation techniques gravitate towards using predominantly English image-text pairs and discard many potentially useful non-English samples. Our work questions this practice. Multilingual data is inherently enriching not only because it provides a gateway to learn about culturally salient concepts, but also because it depicts common concepts differently from monolingual data. We thus conduct a systematic study to explore the performance benefits of using more samples of non-English origins with respect to English vision tasks. By translating all multilingual image-text pairs from a raw web crawl to English and re-filtering them, we increase the prevalence of (translated) multilingual data in the resulting training set. Pre-training on this dataset outperforms using English-only or English-dominated datasets on ImageNet, ImageNet distribution shifts, image-English-text retrieval and on average across 38 tasks from the DataComp benchmark. On a geographically diverse task like GeoDE, we also observe improvements across all regions, with the biggest gain coming from Africa. In addition, we quantitatively show that English and non-English data are significantly different in both image and (translated) text space. We hope that our findings motivate future work to be more intentional about including multicultural and multilingual data, not just when non-English or geographically diverse tasks are involved, but to enhance model capabilities at large.1a1:T651,Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated exceptional capabilities in text understanding, which has paved the way for their expansion into video LLMs (Vid-LLMs) to analyze video data. However, current Vid-LLMs struggle to simultaneously retain high-quality frame-level semantic information (i.e., a sufficient number of tokens per frame) and comprehensive video-level temporal information (i.e., an adequate number of sampled frames per video). This limitation hinders the advancement of Vid-LLMs towards fine-grained video understanding. To address this issue, we introduce the SlowFocus mechanism, which significantly enhances the equivalent sampling frequency without compromising the quality of frame-level visual tokens. SlowFocus begins by identifying the query-related temporal segment based on the posed question, then performs dense sampling on this segment to extract local high-frequency features. A multi-frequency mixing attention module is further leveraged to aggregate these local high-frequency details with global low-frequency contexts for enhanced temporal comprehension. Additionally, to tailor Vid-LLMs to this innovative mechanism, we introduce a set of training strategies aimed at bolstering both temporal grounding and detailed temporal reasoning capabilities. Furthermore, we establish FineAction-CGR, a benchmark specifically devised to assess the ability of Vid-LLMs to process fine-grained temporal understanding tasks. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our mechanism across both existing public video understanding benchmarks and our proposed FineAction-CGR.1a2:T544,Pairwise dot-product self-attention is key to the success of transformers that achieve state-of-the-art performance across a variety of applications in language and vision. This dot-product self-attention computes attention weights among the input tokens using Euclidean distance, which makes the model prone to representation collapse and vulnerable to contaminated samples. In this paper, we propose using a Mahalanobis distance metric for computing the attention weights to stretch the underlying feature space in directions of high contextual relevance. In particular, we define a hyper-ellipsoidal neighborhood around each query to increase the attention weights of the tokens lying in the contextually important directions. We term this novel class of attention Elliptical Attention. Our Elliptical Attention provides two benefits: 1) reducing representation collapse and 2) enhancing the model's robustness as the Elliptical Attention pays more attention to contextually relevant information, rather than focusing on some small subset of informative features. We empirically demonstrate the advantages of Elliptical Attention over the baseline dot-product attention and state-of-the-art attention methods on various practical tasks, including object classification, image
segmentation, and language modeling across different data modalities.1a3:T4fe,Uncertainty quantification in Large Language Models (LLMs) is crucial for applications where safety and reliability are important. In particular, uncertainty can be used to improve the trustworthiness of LLMs by detecting factually incorrect model responses, commonly called hallucinations. Critically, one should seek to capture the model's semantic uncertainty, i.e., the uncertainty over the meanings of LLM outputs, rather than uncertainty over lexical or syntactic variations that do not affect answer correctness.
To address this problem, we propose Kernel Language Entropy (KLE), a novel method for uncertainty estimation in white- and black-box LLMs. KLE defines positive semidefinite unit trace kernels to encode the semantic similarities of LLM outputs and quantifies uncertainty using the von Neumann entropy. It considers pairwise semantic dependencies between answers (or semantic clusters), providing more fine-grained uncertainty estimates than previous methods based on hard clustering of answers. We theoretically prove that KLE generalizes the previous state-of-the-art method called semantic entropy and empirically demonstrate that it improves uncertainty quantification performance across multiple natural language generation datasets and LLM architectures.1a4:T530,Pre-trained foundation models, particularly large language models, have achieved remarkable success and led to massive fine-tuned variants. These models are commonly fine-tuned locally and then uploaded by users to cloud platforms such as HuggingFace for secure storage. However, the huge model number and their billion-level parameters impose heavy storage overhead for cloud with limited resources. Our empirical and theoretical analysis reveals that most fine-tuned models in cloud have a small difference (delta) from their pre-trained models. To this end, we propose a novel lossless compression scheme FM-Delta specifically for storing massive fine-tuned models in cloud. FM-Delta maps fine-tuned and pre-trained model parameters into integers with the same bits, and entropy codes their integer delta. In this way, cloud only needs to store one uncompressed pre-trained model and other compressed fine-tuned models. 
Extensive experiments have demonstrated that FM-Delta efficiently reduces cloud storage consumption for massive fine-tuned models by an average of around 50% with only negligible additional time in most end-to-end cases. For example, on up to 10 fine-tuned models in the GPT-NeoX-20B family, FM-Delta reduces the original storage requirement from 423GB to 205GB, significantly saving cloud storage costs.1a5:T67e,Teaching to improve student models (e.g., knowledge distillation) is an extensively studied methodology in LLMs. However, in human education, teaching enhances not only the students but also the teachers by fostering more rigorous and clearer reasoning, as well as deeper knowledge building. We ask: Can LLMs also learn by teaching (LbT) for better reasoning? If the answer is yes, we can potentially unlock the possibility of continuously advancing the models without solely relying on human-produced data or stronger models. In this paper, we provide a preliminary exploration of this question. We show that LbT ideas can be incorporated into existing LLM training/prompting pipelines and bring improvements. Specifically, we design three methods, each mimicking one of the three levels of LbT: observing students' feedback, learning from the feedback, and learning iteratively, with the goal of improving answer accuracy without training or improving models' inherent capability with fine-tuning. We reveal some findings: (1) Teaching materials that make it easier for students to learn (via in-context learning) have clearer and more accurate logic; (2) Weak-to-strong generalization: LbT might help improve strong models by teaching weak models; (3) Diversity in students might help: teaching multiple students could be better than teaching a single student or the teacher alone. We hope that our exploration can inspire future research on LbT and, more broadly, the adoption of advanced education techniques to improve LLMs. The code and website are at https://github.com/imagination-research/lbt and https://sites.google.com/view/llm-learning-by-teaching.1a6:T40e,Large multimodal models (LMMs) combine unimodal encoders and large language models (LLMs) to perform multimodal tasks. Despite recent advancements towards the interpretability of these models, understanding internal representations of LMMs remains largely a mystery. In this paper, we present a novel framework for the interpretation of LMMs. We propose a dictionary learning based approach, applied to the representation of tokens. The elements of the learned dictionary correspond to our proposed concepts. We show that these concepts are well semantically grounded in both vision and text. Thus we refer to these as ``multi-modal concepts''. 
We qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate the results of the learnt concepts. We show that the extracted multimodal concepts are useful to interpret representations of test samples. Finally, we evaluate the disentanglement between different concepts and the quality of grounding concepts visually and textually. Our implementation is publicly available: https://github.com/mshukor/xl-vlms.1a7:T58c,Neuro-symbolic neural networks have been extensively studied to integrate symbolic operations with neural networks, thereby improving systematic generalization. Specifically, Tensor Product Representation (TPR) framework enables neural networks to perform differentiable symbolic operations by encoding the symbolic structure of data within vector spaces. However, TPR-based neural networks often struggle to decompose unseen data into structured TPR representations, undermining their symbolic operations. To address this decomposition problem, we propose a Discrete Dictionary-based Decomposition (D3) layer designed to enhance the decomposition capabilities of TPR-based models. D3 employs discrete, learnable key-value dictionaries trained to capture symbolic features essential for decomposition operations. It leverages the prior knowledge acquired during training to generate structured TPR representations by mapping input data to pre-learned symbolic features within these dictionaries. D3 is a straightforward drop-in layer that can be seamlessly integrated into any TPR-based model without modifications. Our experimental results demonstrate that D3 significantly improves the systematic generalization of various TPR-based models while requiring fewer additional parameters. Notably, D3 outperforms baseline models on the synthetic task that demands the systematic decomposition of unseen combinatorial data.1a8:T58c,Recent advances in self-supervised models for natural language, vision, and protein sequences have inspired the development of large genomic DNA language models (DNALMs). These models aim to learn generalizable representations of diverse DNA elements, potentially enabling various genomic prediction, interpretation and design tasks. Despite their potential, existing benchmarks do not adequately assess the capabilities of DNALMs on key downstream applications involving an important class of non-coding DNA elements critical for regulating gene activity. In this study, we introduce DART-Eval, a suite of representative benchmarks specifically focused on regulatory DNA to evaluate model performance across zero-shot, probed, and fine-tuned scenarios against contemporary ab initio models as baselines. Our benchmarks target biologically meaningful downstream tasks such as functional sequence feature discovery, predicting cell-type specific regulatory activity, and counterfactual prediction of the impacts of genetic variants. We find that current DNALMs exhibit inconsistent performance and do not offer compelling gains over alternative baseline models for most tasks, while requiring significantly more computational resources. We discuss potentially promising modeling, data curation, and evaluation strategies for the next generation of DNALMs. Our  code is available at https://github.com/kundajelab/DART-Eval1a9:T520,In model inversion attacks (MIAs), adversaries attempt to recover private training data by exploiting access to a well-trained target model. Recent advancements have improved MIA performance using a two-stage generative framework. This approach first employs a generative adversarial network to learn a fixed distributional prior, which is then used to guide the inversion process during the attack. However, in this paper, we observed a phenomenon that such a fixed prior would lead to a low probability of sampling actual private data during the inversion process due to the inherent distribution gap between the prior distribution and the private data distribution, thereby constraining attack performance. To address this limitation, we propose increasing the density around high-quality pseudo-private data—recovered samples through model inversion that exhibit characteristics of the private training data—by slightly tuning the generator. This strategy effectively increases the probability of sampling actual private data that is close to these pseudo-private data during the inversion process. After integrating our method, the generative model inversion pipeline is strengthened, leading to improvements over state-of-the-art MIAs. This paves the way for new research directions in generative MIAs.1aa:T87e,Persona-driven role-playing (PRP) aims to build AI characters that can respond to user queries by faithfully sticking with \emph{all} (factual) statements in persona documents.
Unfortunately, existing faithfulness criteria for PRP are limited to coarse-grained LLM-based scoring without a clear definition or formulation.
This paper presents a pioneering exploration to quantify PRP faithfulness evaluation as a fine-grained and explainable criterion, which also serves as a reliable reference for faithfulness optimization.
Our criterion first discriminates persona statements into \emph{active} and \emph{passive} constraints by identifying the query-statement relevance.
Then, we incorporate all constraints following the principle that the AI character's response should be (a) entailed by active constraints and (b) not contradicted by passive constraints.
We translate this principle mathematically into a novel Active-Passive-Constraint (APC) score, a constraint-wise sum of statement-to-response natural language inference (NLI) scores weighted by constraint-query relevance scores. 
In practice, we build the APC scoring system by symbolically distilling small NLI and relevance discriminators (300M parameters) from GPT-4 for efficiency, and both show high consistency with GPT-4's discrimination.
We validate the quality of the APC score against human evaluation based on example personas with tens of statements, and the results show a high correlation.
As the APC score could faithfully reflect the PRP quality, we further leverage it as a reward system in direct preference optimization (DPO) for better AI characters. 
Our experiments offer a fine-grained and explainable comparison between existing PRP techniques, revealing their advantages and limitations.
We further find APC-based DPO to be one of the most competitive techniques for sticking with all constraints and can be well incorporated with other techniques.
We then extend the scale of the experiments to real persons with hundreds of statements and reach a consistent conclusion. 
Finally, we provide comprehensive analyses and case studies to support the effectiveness of APC and APC-based DPO.1ab:T5a5,We consider the training of the first layer of vision models and notice the clear relationship between pixel values and gradient update magnitudes: the gradients arriving at the weights of a first layer are by definition directly proportional to (normalized) input pixel values. Thus, an image with low contrast has a smaller impact on learning than an image with higher contrast, and a very bright or very dark image has a stronger impact on the weights than an image with moderate brightness. In this work, we propose performing gradient descent on the embeddings produced by the first layer of the model. However, switching to discrete inputs with an embedding layer is not a reasonable option for vision models. Thus, we propose the conceptual procedure of (i) a gradient descent step on first layer activations to construct an activation proposal, and (ii) finding the optimal weights of the first layer, i.e., those weights which minimize the squared distance to the activation proposal. We provide a  closed form solution of the procedure and adjust it for robust stochastic training while computing everything efficiently. Empirically, we find that TrAct (Training Activations) speeds up training by factors between 1.25x and 4x while requiring only a small computational overhead. We demonstrate the utility of TrAct with different optimizers for a range of different vision models including convolutional and transformer architectures.1ac:T541,Image description datasets play a crucial role in the advancement of various applications such as image understanding, text-to-image generation, and text-image retrieval. Currently, image description datasets primarily originate from two sources. One source is the scraping of image-text pairs from the web. Despite their abundance, these descriptions are often of low quality and noisy. Another way is through human labeling. Datasets such as COCO are generally very short and lack details. Although detailed image descriptions can be annotated by humans, the high cost limits their quantity and feasibility. These limitations underscore the need for more efficient and scalable methods to generate accurate and detailed image descriptions. In this paper, we propose an innovative framework termed Image Textualization, which automatically produces high-quality image descriptions by leveraging existing mult-modal large language models (MLLMs) and multiple vision expert models in a collaborative manner. We conduct various experiments to validate the high quality of the descriptions constructed by our framework. Furthermore, we show that MLLMs fine-tuned on our dataset acquire an unprecedented capability of generating richer image descriptions, substantially increasing the length and detail of their output with even less hallucinations.1ad:T4bf,How did humanity coax mathematics from the aether? We explore the Platonic view that mathematics can be discovered from its axioms---a game of conjecture and proof. We describe an agent that jointly learns to pose challenging problems for itself (conjecturing) and solve them (theorem proving). Given a mathematical domain axiomatized in dependent type theory, we first combine methods for constrained decoding and type-directed synthesis to sample valid conjectures from a language model. Our method guarantees well-formed conjectures by construction, even as we start with a randomly initialized model. We use the same model to represent a policy and value function for guiding proof search. Our agent targets generating hard but provable conjectures --- a moving target, since its own theorem proving ability also improves as it trains. We propose novel methods for hindsight relabeling on proof search trees to significantly improve the agent's sample efficiency in both tasks. Experiments on 3 axiomatic domains (propositional logic, arithmetic and group theory) demonstrate that our agent can bootstrap from only the axioms, self-improving in generating true and challenging conjectures and in finding proofs.1ae:T503,Most popular benchmarks for comparing LLMs rely on a limited set of prompt templates, which may not fully capture the LLMs’ abilities and can affect the reproducibility of results on leaderboards. Many recent works empirically verify prompt sensitivity and advocate for changes in LLM evaluation. In this paper, we consider the problem of estimating the performance distribution across many prompt variants instead of finding a single prompt to evaluate with. We introduce PromptEval, a method for estimating performance across a large set of prompts borrowing strength across prompts and examples to produce accurate estimates under practical evaluation budgets. The resulting distribution can be used to obtain performance quantiles to construct various robust performance metrics (e.g., top 95% quantile or median). We prove that PromptEval consistently estimates the performance distribution and demonstrate its efficacy empirically on three prominent LLM benchmarks: MMLU, BIG-bench Hard, and LMentry; for example, PromptEval can accurately estimate performance quantiles across 100 prompt templates on MMLU with a budget equivalent to two single-prompt evaluations. Moreover, we show how PromptEval can be useful in LLM-as-a-judge and best prompt identification applications.1af:T85a,This paper presents VideoStreaming, an advanced vision-language large model (VLLM) for video understanding, that capably understands arbitrary-length video with a constant number of video tokens streamingly encoded and adaptively selected.
The challenge of video understanding in the vision language area mainly lies in the significant computational burden caused by the great number of tokens extracted from long videos. Previous works rely on sparse sampling or frame compression to reduce tokens. However, such approaches either disregard temporal information in a long time span or sacrifice spatial details, resulting in flawed compression. 
To address these limitations, our VideoStreaming has two core designs: Memory-Propagated Streaming Encoding and Adaptive Memory Selection. The Memory-Propagated Streaming Encoding architecture segments long videos into short clips and sequentially encodes each clip with a propagated memory. In each iteration, we utilize the encoded results of the preceding clip as historical memory, which is integrated with the current clip to distill a condensed representation that encapsulates the video content up to the current timestamp. This method not only incorporates long-term temporal dynamics into the streaming encoding process but also yields a fixed-length memory as a global representation for arbitrarily long videos. After the encoding process, the Adaptive Memory Selection strategy selects a constant number of question-related memories from all the historical memories, and feeds them into the LLM to generate informative responses. The question-related selection reduces redundancy within the memories, enabling efficient and precise video understanding. Meanwhile, the disentangled video extraction and reasoning design allows the LLM to answer different questions about a video by directly selecting corresponding memories, without the need to encode the whole video for each question. Through extensive experiments, our model achieves superior performance and higher efficiency on long video benchmarks, showcasing precise temporal comprehension for detailed question answering.1b0:T5fd,Vision Language Models (VLMs) demonstrate remarkable proficiency in addressing a wide array of visual questions, which requires strong perception and reasoning faculties. Assessing these two competencies independently is crucial for model refinement, despite the inherent difficulty due to the intertwined nature of seeing and reasoning in existing VLMs. To tackle this issue, we present Prism, an innovative framework designed to disentangle the perception and reasoning processes involved in visual question solving. Prism comprises two distinct stages: a perception stage that utilizes a VLM to extract and articulate visual information in textual form, and a reasoning stage that formulates responses based on the extracted visual information using a Large Language Model (LLM). This modular design enables the systematic comparison and assessment of both proprietary and open-source VLM for their perception and reasoning strengths. Our analytical framework provides several valuable insights, underscoring Prism's potential as a cost-effective solution for vision-language tasks.
By combining a streamlined VLM focused on perception with a powerful LLM tailored for reasoning, Prism achieves superior results in general vision-language tasks while substantially cutting down on training and operational expenses. Quantitative evaluations show that Prism, when configured with a vanilla 2B LLaVA and freely accessible GPT-3.5, delivers performance on par with VLMs $10 \times$ larger on the rigorous multimodal benchmark MMStar.1b1:T46e,AI models are increasingly prevalent in high-stakes environments, necessitating thorough assessment of their capabilities and risks. Benchmarks are popular for measuring these attributes and for comparing model performance, tracking progress, and identifying weaknesses in foundation and non-foundation models. They can inform model selection for downstream tasks and influence policy initiatives. However, not all benchmarks are the same: their quality depends on their design and usability. In this paper, we develop an assessment framework considering 40 best practices across a benchmark's life cycle and evaluate 25 AI benchmarks against it. We find that there exist large quality differences and that commonly used benchmarks suffer from significant issues. We further find that most benchmarks do not report statistical significance of their results nor can results be easily replicated. To support benchmark developers in aligning with best practices, we provide a checklist for minimum quality assurance based on our assessment. We also develop a living repository of benchmark assessments to support benchmark comparability.1b2:T570,This paper uses chess, a landmark planning problem in AI, to assess transformers' performance on a planning task where memorization is futile $\unicode{x2013}$ even at a large scale. To this end, we release ChessBench, a large-scale benchmark dataset of 10 million chess games with legal move and value annotations (15 billion data points) provided by Stockfish 16, the state-of-the-art chess engine. We train transformers with up to 270 million parameters on ChessBench via supervised learning and perform extensive ablations to assess the impact of dataset size, model size, architecture type, and different prediction targets (state-values, action-values, and behavioral cloning). Our largest models learn to predict action-values for novel boards quite accurately, implying highly non-trivial generalization. Despite performing no explicit search, our resulting chess policy solves challenging chess puzzles and achieves a surprisingly strong Lichess blitz Elo of 2895 against humans (grandmaster level). We also compare to Leela Chess Zero and AlphaZero (trained without supervision via self-play) with and without search. We show that, although a remarkably good approximation of Stockfish's search-based algorithm can be distilled into large-scale transformers via supervised learning, perfect distillation is still beyond reach, thus making ChessBench well-suited for future research.1b3:T70f,The prohibitive sizes of Large Language Models (LLMs) today make it difficult to deploy them on memory-constrained edge devices. This work introduces $\rm CALDERA$ -- a new post-training LLM compression algorithm that harnesses the inherent low-rank structure of a weight matrix $\mathbf{W}$ by approximating it via a low-rank, low-precision decomposition as $\mathbf{W} \approx \mathbf{Q} + \mathbf{L}\mathbf{R}$. Here, $\mathbf{L}$ and $\mathbf{R}$ are low rank factors, and the entries of $\mathbf{Q}$, $\mathbf{L}$ and $\mathbf{R}$ are quantized. The model is compressed by substituting each layer with its $\mathbf{Q} + \mathbf{L}\mathbf{R}$ decomposition, and the zero-shot performance of the compressed model is evaluated. Additionally, $\mathbf{L}$ and $\mathbf{R}$ are readily amenable to low-rank adaptation, consequently enhancing the zero-shot performance. $\rm CALDERA$ obtains this decomposition by formulating it as an optimization problem $\min_{\mathbf{Q},\mathbf{L},\mathbf{R}}\lVert(\mathbf{Q} + \mathbf{L}\mathbf{R} - \mathbf{W})\mathbf{X}^\top\rVert_{\rm F}^2$, where $\mathbf{X}$ is the calibration data, and $\mathbf{Q}, \mathbf{L}, \mathbf{R}$ are constrained to be representable using low-precision formats. Theoretical upper bounds on the approximation error of $\rm CALDERA$ are established using a rank-constrained regression framework, and the tradeoff between compression ratio and model performance is studied by analyzing the impact of target rank and quantization bit budget. Results illustrate that compressing LlaMa-$2$ $7$B/$13B$/$70$B and LlaMa-$3$ $8$B models using $\rm CALDERA$ outperforms existing post-training LLM compression techniques in the regime of less than $2.5$ bits per parameter. The implementation is available at: https://github.com/pilancilab/caldera.1b4:T4f2,Diffusion models have gained traction as powerful algorithms for synthesizing high-quality images. Central to these algorithms is the diffusion process, a set of equations which maps data to noise in a way that can significantly affect performance. In this paper, we explore whether the diffusion process can be learned from data. Our work is grounded in Bayesian inference and seeks to improve log-likelihood estimation by casting the learned diffusion process as an approximate variational posterior that yields a tighter lower bound (ELBO) on the likelihood. A widely held assumption is that the ELBO is invariant to the noise process: our work dispels this assumption and proposes multivariate learned adaptive noise (MULAN), a learned diffusion process that applies noise at different rates across an image. Specifically, our method relies on a multivariate noise schedule that is a function of the data to ensure that the ELBO is no longer invariant to the choice of the noise schedule as in previous works. Empirically, MULAN sets a new state-of-the-art in density estimation on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet and reduces the number of training steps by 50%. We provide the code, along with a blog post and video tutorial on the project page: https://s-sahoo.com/MuLAN1b5:T48e,We propose ESPACE, an LLM compression technique based on dimensionality reduction of activations. Unlike prior works on weight-centric tensor decomposition, ESPACE projects activations onto a pre-calibrated set of principal components. The activation-centrality of the approach enables retraining LLMs with no loss of expressivity; while at inference, weight decomposition is obtained as a byproduct of matrix multiplication associativity. Theoretical results on the construction of projection matrices with optimal computational accuracy are provided. Experimentally, we find ESPACE enables 50% compression of GPT3, Llama2, and Nemotron4 models with small accuracy degradation, as low as a 0.18 perplexity increase on GPT3-22B. At lower compression rates of 20% to 40%, ESPACE drives GPT3 models to outperforming their baseline, by up to a 0.38 decrease in perplexity for GPT3-8B. ESPACE also reduces GEMM execution time and prefill inference latency on existing hardware. Comparison with related works on compressing Llama2-7B via matrix factorization shows that ESPACE is a first step in advancing the state-of-the-art in tensor decomposition compression of LLMs.1b6:T42e,We investigate the radioactivity of text generated by large language models (LLM), i.e. whether it is possible to detect that such synthetic input was used to train a subsequent LLM. Current methods like membership inference or active IP protection either work only in settings where the suspected text is known or do not provide reliable statistical guarantees. We discover that, on the contrary, it is possible to reliably determine if a language model was trained on synthetic data if that data is output by a watermarked LLM. Our new methods, specialized for radioactivity, detects with a provable confidence weak residuals of the watermark signal in the fine-tuned LLM. We link the radioactivity contamination level to the following properties: the watermark robustness, its proportion in the training set, and the fine-tuning process. For instance, if the suspect model is open-weight, we demonstrate that training on watermarked instructions can be detected with high confidence ($p$-value $<10^{-5}$) even when as little as $5\%$ of training text is watermarked.1b7:T494,Energy-based models (EBMs) offer a flexible framework for probabilistic modelling across various data domains. However, training EBMs on data in discrete or mixed state spaces poses significant challenges due to the lack of robust and fast sampling methods. In this work, we propose to train discrete EBMs with Energy Discrepancy, a loss function which only requires the evaluation of the energy function at data points and their perturbed counterparts, thus eliminating the need for Markov chain Monte Carlo. We introduce perturbations of the data distribution by simulating a diffusion process on the discrete state space endowed with a graph structure. This allows us to inform the choice of perturbation from the structure of the modelled discrete variable, while the continuous time parameter enables fine-grained control of the perturbation. Empirically, we demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed approaches in a wide range of applications, including the estimation of discrete densities with non-binary vocabulary and binary image modelling. Finally, we train EBMs on tabular data sets with applications in synthetic data generation and calibrated classification.1b8:T4bf,Multi-Modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance in various VQA tasks. However, they often lack interpretability and struggle with complex visual inputs, especially when the resolution of the input image is high or when the interested region that could provide key information for answering the question is small. To address these challenges, we collect and introduce the large-scale Visual CoT dataset comprising 438k question-answer pairs, annotated with intermediate bounding boxes highlighting key regions essential for answering the questions. Additionally, about 98k pairs of them are annotated with detailed reasoning steps. Importantly, we propose a multi-turn processing pipeline that dynamically focuses on visual inputs and provides interpretable thoughts. We also introduce the related benchmark to evaluate the MLLMs in scenarios requiring specific local region identification.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework and shed light on better inference strategies. The Visual CoT dataset, benchmark, and pre-trained models are available on this [website](https://hao-shao.com/projects/viscot.html) to support further research in this area.1b9:T5b3,While Large Language Models (LLMs) have become immensely popular due to their outstanding performance on a broad range of tasks, these models are prone to producing hallucinations— outputs that are fallacious or fabricated yet often appear plausible or tenable at a glance. In this paper, we conduct a comprehensive investigation into the nature of hallucinations within LLMs and furthermore explore effective techniques for detecting such inaccuracies in various real-world settings. Prior approaches to detect hallucinations in LLM outputs, such as consistency checks or retrieval-based methods, typically assume access to multiple model responses or large databases. These techniques, however, tend to be computationally expensive in practice, thereby limiting their applicability to real-time analysis. In contrast, in this work, we seek to identify hallucinations within a single response in both white-box and black-box settings by analyzing the internal hidden states, attention maps, and output prediction probabilities of an auxiliary LLM. In addition, we also study hallucination detection in scenarios where ground-truth references are also available, such as in the setting of Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG). We demonstrate that the proposed detection methods are extremely compute-efficient, with speedups of up to 45x and 450x over other baselines, while achieving significant improvements in detection performance over diverse datasets.1ba:T655,Human-Oriented Binary Reverse Engineering (HOBRE) lies at the intersection of binary and source code, aiming to lift binary code to human-readable content relevant to source code, thereby bridging the binary-source semantic gap. Recent advancements in uni-modal code model pre-training, particularly in generative Source Code Foundation Models (SCFMs) and binary understanding models, have laid the groundwork for transfer learning applicable to HOBRE. However, existing approaches for HOBRE rely heavily on uni-modal models like SCFMs for supervised fine-tuning or general LLMs for prompting, resulting in sub-optimal performance. Inspired by recent progress in large multi-modal models, we propose that it is possible to harness the strengths of uni-modal code models from both sides to bridge the semantic gap effectively. In this paper, we introduce a novel probe-and-recover framework that incorporates a binary-source encoder-decoder model and black-box LLMs for binary analysis. Our approach leverages the pre-trained knowledge within SCFMs to synthesize relevant, symbol-rich code fragments as context. This additional context enables black-box LLMs to enhance recovery accuracy. We demonstrate significant improvements in zero-shot binary summarization and binary function name recovery, with a 10.3% relative gain in CHRF and a 16.7% relative gain in a GPT4-based metric for summarization, as well as a 6.7% and 7.4% absolute increase in token-level precision and recall for name recovery, respectively. These results highlight the effectiveness of our approach in automating and improving binary code analysis.1bb:T636,We reveal the theoretical foundations of techniques for editing large language models, and present new methods which can do so without requiring retraining. Our theoretical insights show that a single metric (a measure of the intrinsic dimension of the model's features) can be used to assess a model's editability and reveals its previously unrecognised susceptibility to malicious *stealth attacks*. This metric is fundamental to predicting the success of a variety of editing approaches, and reveals new bridges between disparate families of editing methods. We collectively refer to these as *stealth editing* methods, because they directly update a model's weights to specify its response to specific known hallucinating prompts without affecting other model behaviour. By carefully applying our theoretical insights, we are able to introduce a new *jet-pack* network block which is optimised for highly selective model editing, uses only standard network operations, and can be inserted into existing networks. We also reveal the vulnerability of language models to stealth attacks: a small change to a model's weights which fixes its response to a single attacker-chosen prompt. Stealth attacks are computationally simple, do not require access to or knowledge of the model's training data, and therefore represent a potent yet previously unrecognised threat to redistributed foundation models. Extensive experimental results illustrate and support our methods and their theoretical underpinnings. Demos and source code are available at https://github.com/qinghua-zhou/stealth-edits.1bc:T68b,Due to the rapid generation and dissemination of information, large language models (LLMs) quickly run out of date despite enormous development costs. To address the crucial need to keep models updated, online learning has emerged as a critical tool when utilizing LLMs for real-world applications. However, given the ever-expanding corpus of unseen documents and the large parameter space of modern LLMs, efficient adaptation is essential. To address these challenges, we propose Memory of Amortized Contexts (MAC), an efficient and effective online adaptation framework for LLMs with strong knowledge retention. We propose a feature extraction and memory-augmentation approach to compress and extract information from new documents into compact modulations stored in a memory bank. When answering questions, our model attends to and extracts relevant knowledge from this memory bank. To learn informative modulations in an efficient manner, we utilize amortization-based meta-learning, which substitutes an otherwise required optimization process with a single forward pass of the encoder. Subsequently, we learn to choose from and aggregate selected documents into a single modulation by conditioning on the question, allowing us to adapt a frozen language model during test time without requiring further gradient updates. Our experiment demonstrates the superiority of MAC in multiple aspects, including online adaptation performance, time, and memory efficiency. In addition, we show how MAC can be combined with and improve the performance of popular alternatives such as retrieval augmented generations (RAGs). Code is available at: https://github.com/jihoontack/MAC.1bd:T4cc,Non-autoregressive Transformers (NATs) are recently applied in direct speech-to-speech translation systems, which convert speech across different languages without intermediate text data. Although NATs generate high-quality outputs and offer faster inference than autoregressive models, they tend to produce incoherent and repetitive results due to complex data distribution (e.g., acoustic and linguistic variations in speech). In this work, we introduce DiffNorm, a diffusion-based normalization strategy that simplifies data distributions for training NAT models. After training with a self-supervised noise estimation objective, DiffNorm constructs normalized target data by denoising synthetically corrupted speech features. Additionally, we propose to regularize NATs with classifier-free guidance, improving model robustness and translation quality by randomly dropping out source information during training. Our strategies result in a notable improvement of about $+7$ ASR-BLEU for English-Spanish (En-Es) translation and $+2$ ASR-BLEU for English-French (En-Fr) on the CVSS benchmark, while attaining over $14\times$ speedup for En-Es and $5 \times$ speedup for En-Fr translations compared to autoregressive baselines.1be:T486,The rise of large language models (LLMs) has significantly transformed both the construction and application of information retrieval (IR) systems. 
However, current interactions between IR systems and LLMs remain limited, with LLMs merely serving as part of components within IR systems, and IR systems being constructed independently of LLMs. This separated architecture restricts knowledge sharing and deep collaboration between them.
In this paper, we introduce Self-Retrieval, a novel end-to-end LLM-driven information retrieval architecture.
Self-Retrieval unifies all essential IR functions within a single LLM, leveraging the inherent capabilities of LLMs throughout the IR process.
Specifically, Self-Retrieval internalizes the retrieval corpus through self-supervised learning,  transforms the retrieval process into sequential passage generation, and performs relevance assessment for reranking.
Experimental results demonstrate that Self-Retrieval not only outperforms existing retrieval approaches by a significant margin, but also substantially enhances the performance of LLM-driven downstream applications like retrieval-augmented generation.1bf:T56f,AI-driven design problems, such as DNA/protein sequence design, are commonly tackled from two angles: generative modeling, which efficiently captures the feasible design space (e.g., natural images or biological sequences), and model-based optimization, which utilizes reward models for extrapolation. To combine the strengths of both approaches, we adopt a hybrid method that fine-tunes cutting-edge diffusion models by optimizing reward models through RL. Although prior work has explored similar avenues, they primarily focus on scenarios where accurate reward models are accessible. In contrast, we concentrate on an offline setting where a reward model is unknown, and we must learn from static offline datasets, a common scenario in scientific domains. In offline scenarios, existing approaches tend to suffer from overoptimization, as they may be misled by the reward model in out-of-distribution regions. To address this, we introduce a conservative fine-tuning approach, BRAID, by optimizing a conservative reward model, which includes additional penalization outside of offline data distributions. Through empirical and theoretical analysis, we demonstrate the capability of our approach to outperform the best designs in offline data, leveraging the extrapolation capabilities of reward models while avoiding the generation of invalid designs through pre-trained diffusion models.1c0:T460,This paper studies the scaling behavior of state-space models (SSMs) and their structured variants, such as Mamba, that have recently arisen in popularity as alternatives to transformer-based neural network architectures. Specifically, we focus on the capability of SSMs to learn features as their network width approaches infinity. Our findings reveal that established scaling rules, such as the Maximal Update Parameterization, fail to support feature learning as these models cannot be represented in the form of Tensor Programs. Additionally, we demonstrate that spectral scaling conditions, shown to be effective for feature learning in a host of other architectures, do not hold the same implications for SSMs. Through a detailed signal propagation analysis in SSMs, both forward and backward, we identify the appropriate scaling necessary for non-trivial feature evolution in the infinite-width limit. Our proposed scaling shows behavior akin to the Maximal Update Parameterization, such as improved stability, better generalization, and transferability of optimal hyper-parameters from small to large scale SSMs.1c1:T58c,Fine-tuned vision-language models (VLMs) often capture spurious correlations between image features and textual attributes, resulting in degraded zero-shot performance at test time. Existing approaches for addressing spurious correlations (i) primarily operate at the global image-level rather than intervening directly on fine-grained image features and (ii) are predominantly designed for unimodal settings. In this work, we present RaVL, which takes a fine-grained perspective on VLM robustness by discovering and mitigating spurious correlations using local image features rather than operating at the global image level. Given a fine-tuned VLM, RaVL first discovers spurious correlations by leveraging a region-level clustering approach to identify precise image features contributing to zero-shot classification errors. Then, RaVL mitigates the identified spurious correlation with a novel region-aware loss function that enables the VLM to focus on relevant regions and ignore spurious relationships during fine-tuning. We evaluate RaVL on 654 VLMs with various model architectures, data domains, and learned spurious correlations. Our results show that RaVL accurately discovers (191% improvement over the closest baseline) and mitigates (8.2% improvement on worst-group image classification accuracy) spurious correlations. Qualitative evaluations on general-domain and medical-domain VLMs confirm our findings.1c2:T41b,Deep learning on tabular data, and particularly tabular representation learning, has recently gained growing interest. However, representation learning for relational databases with multiple tables is still an underexplored area, which may be attributed to the lack of openly available resources. To support the development of foundation models for tabular data and relational databases, we introduce WikiDBs, a novel open-source corpus of 100,000 relational databases. Each database consists of multiple tables connected by foreign keys. The corpus is based on Wikidata and aims to follow certain characteristics of real-world databases. In this paper, we describe the dataset and our method for creating it. By making our code publicly available, we enable others to create tailored versions of the dataset, for example, by creating databases in different languages. Finally, we conduct a set of initial experiments to showcase how WikiDBs can be used to train for data engineering tasks, such as missing value imputation and column type annotation.1c3:T62a,Large language models have demonstrated remarkable capabilities but their performance is heavily reliant on effective prompt engineering. Automatic prompt optimization (APO) methods are designed to automate this and can be broadly categorized into those targeting instructions (instruction optimization, IO) vs. those targeting exemplars (exemplar optimization, EO). Despite their shared objective, these have evolved rather independently, with IO receiving more research attention recently. This paper seeks to bridge this gap by comprehensively comparing the performance of representative IO and EO techniques both isolation and combination on a diverse set of challenging tasks. Our findings reveal that intelligently reusing model-generated input-output pairs obtained from evaluating prompts on the validation set as exemplars, consistently improves performance on top of IO methods but is currently under-investigated. We also find that despite the recent focus on IO, how we select exemplars can outweigh how we optimize instructions, with EO strategies as simple as random search outperforming state-of-the-art IO methods with seed instructions without any optimization. Moreover, we observe a synergy between EO and IO, with optimal combinations surpassing the individual contributions. We conclude that studying exemplar optimization both as a standalone method and its optimal combination with instruction optimization remain a crucial aspect of APO and deserve greater consideration in future research, even in the era of highly capable instruction-following models.1c4:T44f,In this work, we propose an Implicit Regularization Enhancement (IRE) framework to accelerate the discovery of flat solutions in deep learning, thereby improving generalization and convergence. 
Specifically, IRE decouples the dynamics of flat and sharp directions, which boosts the sharpness reduction along flat directions while maintaining the training stability in sharp directions. We show that IRE can be practically incorporated with *generic base optimizers* without introducing significant computational overload. Experiments show that IRE consistently improves the generalization performance for image classification tasks across a variety of benchmark datasets (CIFAR-10/100, ImageNet) and models (ResNets and ViTs). 
Surprisingly, IRE also  achieves a $2\times$ *speed-up* compared to AdamW in the pre-training of Llama models (of sizes ranging from 60M to 229M) on datasets including Wikitext-103, Minipile, and Openwebtext. Moreover, we provide theoretical guarantees, showing that IRE can substantially accelerate the convergence towards flat minima in Sharpness-aware Minimization (SAM).1c5:T54f,In this paper, we propose a post-training quantization framework of large vision-language models (LVLMs) for efficient multi-modal inference. Conventional quantization methods sequentially search the layer-wise rounding functions by minimizing activation discretization errors, which fails to acquire optimal quantization strategy without considering cross-layer dependency. On the contrary, we mine the cross-layer dependency that significantly influences discretization errors of the entire vision-language model, and embed this dependency into optimal quantization strategy searching with low search cost. Specifically, we observe the strong correlation between the activation entropy and the cross-layer dependency concerning output discretization errors. Therefore, we employ the entropy as the proxy to partition blocks optimally, which aims to achieve satisfying trade-offs between discretization errors and the search cost. Moreover, we optimize the visual encoder to disentangle the cross-layer dependency for fine-grained decomposition of search space, so that the search cost is further reduced without harming the quantization accuracy. Experimental results demonstrate that our method compresses the memory by 2.78x and increase generate speed by 1.44x about 13B LLaVA model without performance degradation on diverse multi-modal reasoning tasks.1c6:T542,Graphs data is crucial for many applications, and much of it exists in the relations described in textual format. As a result, being able to accurately recall and encode a graph described in earlier text is a basic yet pivotal ability that LLMs need to demonstrate if they are to perform reasoning tasks that involve graph-structured information. Human performance at graph recall by has been studied by cognitive scientists for decades, and has been found to often exhibit certain structural patterns of bias that align with human handling of social relationships. To date, however, we know little about how LLMs behave in analogous graph recall tasks: do their recalled graphs also exhibit certain biased patterns, and if so, how do they compare with humans and affect other graph reasoning tasks? In this work, we perform the first systematical study of graph recall by LLMs, investigating the accuracy and biased microstructures (local structural patterns) in their recall. We find that LLMs not only underperform often in graph recall, but also tend to favor more triangles and alternating 2-paths. Moreover, we find that more advanced LLMs have a striking dependence on the domain that a real-world graph comes from --- by yielding the best recall accuracy when the graph is narrated in a language style consistent with its original domain.1c7:T660,This paper presents OmniJARVIS, a novel Vision-Language-Action (VLA) model for open-world instruction-following agents in Minecraft. Compared to prior works that either emit textual goals to separate controllers or produce the control command directly, OmniJARVIS seeks a different path to ensure both strong reasoning and efficient decision-making capabilities via unified tokenization of multimodal interaction data. First, we introduce a self-supervised approach to learn a behavior encoder that produces discretized tokens for behavior trajectories $\tau = \{o_0, a_0, \dots\}$ and an imitation learning policy decoder conditioned on these tokens. These additional behavior tokens will be augmented to the vocabulary of pretrained Multimodal Language Models. With this encoder, we then pack long-term multimodal interactions involving task instructions, memories, thoughts, observations, textual responses, behavior trajectories, etc into unified token sequences and model them with autoregressive transformers. Thanks to the semantically meaningful behavior tokens, the resulting VLA model, OmniJARVIS, can reason (by producing chain-of-thoughts), plan, answer questions, and act (by producing behavior tokens for the imitation learning policy decoder). OmniJARVIS demonstrates excellent performances on a comprehensive collection of atomic, programmatic, and open-ended tasks in open-world Minecraft. Our analysis further unveils the crucial design principles in interaction data formation, unified tokenization, and its scaling potentials. The dataset, models, and code will be released at https://craftjarvis.org/OmniJARVIS.1c8:T44a,In-Context Learning (ICL) empowers Large Language Models (LLMs) to tackle various tasks by providing input-output examples as additional inputs, referred to as demonstrations. Nevertheless, the performance of ICL could be easily impacted by the quality of selected demonstrations. Existing efforts generally learn a retriever model to score each demonstration for selecting suitable demonstrations, however, the effect is suboptimal due to the large search space and the noise from unhelpful demonstrations. In this study, we introduce MoD, which partitions the demonstration pool into groups, each governed by an expert to reduce search space. We further design an expert-wise training strategy to alleviate the impact of unhelpful demonstrations when optimizing the retriever model. During inference, experts collaboratively retrieve demonstrations for the input query to enhance the  ICL performance. We validate MoD via experiments across a range of NLP datasets and tasks, demonstrating its state-of-the-art performance and shedding new light on the future design of retrieval methods for ICL.1c9:T5d2,Recent work on studying memorization in self-supervised learning (SSL) suggests that even though SSL encoders are trained on millions of images, they still memorize individual data points. While effort has been put into characterizing the memorized data and linking encoder memorization to downstream utility, little is known about where the memorization happens inside SSL encoders. To close this gap, we propose two metrics for localizing memorization in SSL encoders on a per-layer (LayerMem) and per-unit basis (UnitMem). Our localization methods are independent of the downstream task, do not require any label information, and can be performed in a forward pass. By localizing memorization in various encoder architectures (convolutional and transformer-based) trained on diverse datasets with contrastive and non-contrastive SSL frameworks, we find that (1) while SSL memorization increases with layer depth, highly memorizing units are distributed across the entire encoder, (2) a significant fraction of units in SSL encoders experiences surprisingly high memorization of individual data points, which is in contrast to models trained under supervision, (3) atypical (or outlier) data points cause much higher layer and unit memorization than standard data points, and (4) in vision transformers, most memorization happens in the fully-connected layers. Finally, we show that localizing memorization in SSL has the potential to improve fine-tuning and to inform pruning strategies.1ca:T5f2,Uncertainty is introduced in optimized DNNs through stochastic algorithms, forming specific distributions. Training models can be seen as random sampling from this distribution of optimized models. In this work, we study the distribution of optimized DNNs as a family of functions by leveraging a pointwise approach. We focus on the input saliency maps, as the input gradient field is decisive to the models' mathematical essence. Our investigation of saliency maps reveals a counter-intuitive trend: two stochastically optimized models tend to resemble each other more as either of their capacities increases. Therefore, we hypothesize several properties of these distributions, suggesting that (1) Within the same model architecture (e.g., CNNs, ResNets), different family variants (e.g., varying capacities) tend to align in terms of their population mean directions of the input salience. And (2) the distributions of optimized models follow a convergence trend to their shared population mean as the capacity increases. Furthermore, we also propose semi-parametric distributions based on the Saw distribution to model the convergence trend, satisfying all the counter-intuitive observations. Our experiments shed light on the significant implications of our hypotheses in various application domains, including black-box attacks, deep ensembles, etc. These findings not only enhance our understanding of DNN behaviors but also offer valuable insights for their practical application in diverse areas of deep learning.1cb:T573,Recent advances in automated theorem proving leverages language models to explore expanded search spaces by step-by-step proof generation. However, such approaches are usually based on short-sighted heuristics (e.g., log probability or value function scores) that potentially lead to suboptimal or even distracting subgoals, preventing us from finding longer proofs. To address this challenge, we propose POETRY (PrOvE Theorems RecursivelY), which proves theorems in a recursive, level-by-level manner in the Isabelle theorem prover. Unlike previous step-by-step methods, POETRY searches for a verifiable sketch of the proof at each level and focuses on solving the current level's theorem or conjecture. Detailed proofs of intermediate conjectures within the sketch are temporarily replaced by a placeholder tactic called sorry, deferring their proofs to subsequent levels. This approach allows the theorem to be tackled incrementally by outlining the overall theorem at the first level and then solving the intermediate conjectures at deeper levels. Experiments are conducted on the miniF2F and PISA datasets and significant performance gains are observed in our POETRY approach over state-of-the-art methods. POETRY on miniF2F achieves an average proving success rate improvement of 5.1%. Moreover, we observe a substantial increase in the maximum proof length found by POETRY, from 10 to 26.1cc:T648,The inversion of diffusion model sampling, which aims to find the corresponding initial noise of a sample, plays a critical role in various tasks.
Recently, several heuristic exact inversion samplers have been proposed to address the inexact inversion issue in a training-free manner. 
However, the theoretical properties of these heuristic samplers remain unknown and they often exhibit mediocre sampling quality.
In this paper, we introduce a generic formulation, \emph{Bidirectional Explicit Linear Multi-step} (BELM) samplers, of the exact inversion samplers, which includes all previously proposed heuristic exact inversion samplers as special cases.
The BELM formulation is derived from the variable-stepsize-variable-formula linear multi-step method via integrating a bidirectional explicit constraint. We highlight this bidirectional explicit constraint is the key of mathematically exact inversion.
We systematically investigate the Local Truncation Error (LTE) within the BELM framework and show that the existing heuristic designs of exact inversion samplers yield sub-optimal LTE.
Consequently, we propose the Optimal BELM (O-BELM) sampler through the LTE minimization approach.
We conduct additional analysis to substantiate the theoretical stability and global convergence property of the proposed optimal sampler.
Comprehensive experiments demonstrate our O-BELM sampler establishes the exact inversion property while achieving high-quality sampling.
Additional experiments in image editing and image interpolation highlight the extensive  potential of applying O-BELM in varying applications.1cd:T599,Zero-shot graph machine learning, especially with graph neural networks (GNNs), has garnered significant interest due to the challenge of scarce labeled data. While methods like self-supervised learning and graph prompt learning have been extensively explored, they often rely on fine-tuning with task-specific labels, limiting their effectiveness in zero-shot scenarios. Inspired by the zero-shot capabilities of instruction-fine-tuned large language models (LLMs), we introduce a novel framework named Token Embedding-Aligned Graph Language Model (TEA-GLM) that leverages LLMs as cross-dataset and cross-task zero-shot learners for graph machine learning. Concretely, we pretrain a GNN, aligning its representations with token embeddings of an LLM. We then train a linear projector that transforms the GNN's representations into a fixed number of graph token embeddings without tuning the LLM. A unified instruction is designed for various graph tasks at different levels, such as node classification (node-level) and link prediction (edge-level). These design choices collectively enhance our method's effectiveness in zero-shot learning, setting it apart from existing methods. Experiments show that our graph token embeddings help the LLM predictor achieve state-of-the-art performance on unseen datasets and tasks compared to other methods using LLMs as predictors. Our code is available at https://github.com/W-rudder/TEA-GLM.1ce:T583,Dataflow analysis is a fundamental code analysis technique that identifies dependencies between program values. Traditional approaches typically necessitate successful compilation and expert customization, hindering their applicability and usability for analyzing uncompilable programs with evolving analysis needs in real-world scenarios. This paper presents LLMDFA, an LLM-powered compilation-free and customizable dataflow analysis framework. To address hallucinations for reliable results, we decompose the problem into several subtasks and introduce a series of novel strategies. Specifically, we leverage LLMs to synthesize code that outsources delicate reasoning to external expert tools, such as using a parsing library to extract program values of interest and invoking an automated theorem prover to validate path feasibility. Additionally, we adopt a few-shot chain-of-thought prompting to summarize dataflow facts in individual functions, aligning the LLMs with the program semantics of small code snippets to mitigate hallucinations. We evaluate LLMDFA on synthetic programs to detect three representative types of bugs and on real-world Android applications for customized bug detection. On average, LLMDFA achieves 87.10% precision and 80.77% recall, surpassing existing techniques with F1 score improvements of up to 0.35. We have open-sourced LLMDFA at https://github.com/chengpeng-wang/LLMDFA.1cf:T569,Instruction following is one of the fundamental capabilities of large language models (LLMs). As the ability of LLMs is constantly improving, they have been increasingly applied to deal with complex human instructions in real-world scenarios. Therefore, how to evaluate the ability of complex instruction-following of LLMs has become a critical research problem. Existing benchmarks mainly focus on modeling different types of constraints in human instructions while neglecting the composition of different constraints, which is an indispensable constituent in complex instructions. To this end, we propose ComplexBench, a benchmark for comprehensively evaluating the ability of LLMs to follow complex instructions composed of multiple constraints. We propose a hierarchical taxonomy for complex instructions, including 4 constraint types, 19 constraint dimensions, and 4 composition types, and manually collect a high-quality dataset accordingly. To make the evaluation reliable, we augment LLM-based evaluators with rules to effectively verify whether generated texts can satisfy each constraint and composition. Furthermore, we obtain the final evaluation score based on the dependency structure determined by different composition types. ComplexBench identifies significant deficiencies in existing LLMs when dealing with complex instructions with multiple constraints composition.1d0:T8c0,Large Language Models (LLMs) are widely used for knowledge-seeking purposes yet suffer from hallucinations. The knowledge boundary of an LLM limits its factual understanding, beyond which it may begin to hallucinate. Investigating the perception of LLMs' knowledge boundary is crucial for detecting hallucinations and LLMs' reliable generation. Current studies perceive LLMs' knowledge boundary on questions with concrete answers (close-ended questions) while paying limited attention to semi-open-ended questions that correspond to many potential answers. Some researchers achieve it by judging whether the question is answerable or not. However, this paradigm is not so suitable for semi-open-ended questions, which are usually ``partially answerable questions'' containing both answerable answers and ambiguous (unanswerable) answers. Ambiguous answers are essential for knowledge-seeking, but it may go beyond the knowledge boundary of LLMs. In this paper, we perceive the LLMs' knowledge boundary with semi-open-ended questions by discovering more ambiguous answers. First, we apply an LLM-based approach to construct semi-open-ended questions and obtain answers from a target LLM. Unfortunately, the output probabilities of mainstream black-box LLMs are inaccessible to sample more low-probability ambiguous answers. Therefore, we apply an open-sourced auxiliary model to explore ambiguous answers for the target LLM. We calculate the nearest semantic representation for existing answers to estimate their probabilities, with which we reduce the generation probability of high-probability existing answers to achieve a more effective generation. Finally, we compare the results from the RAG-based evaluation and LLM self-evaluation to categorize four types of ambiguous answers that are beyond the knowledge boundary of the target LLM. Following our method, we construct a dataset to perceive the knowledge boundary for GPT-4. We find that GPT-4 performs poorly on semi-open-ended questions and is often unaware of its knowledge boundary. Besides, our auxiliary model, LLaMA-2-13B, is effective in discovering many ambiguous answers, including correct answers neglected by GPT-4 and delusive wrong answers GPT-4 struggles to identify.1d1:T6e7,Language models as intelligent agents push the boundaries of sequential decision-making agents but struggle with limited knowledge of environmental dynamics and exponentially huge action space. Recent efforts like GLAM and TWOSOME manually constrain the action space to a restricted subset and employ reinforcement learning to align agents' knowledge with specific environments. However, they overlook fine-grained credit assignments for intra-action tokens, which is essential for efficient language agent optimization, and rely on human's prior knowledge to restrict action space. This paper proposes decomposing language agent optimization from the action level to the token level, offering finer supervision for each intra-action token and manageable optimization complexity in environments with unrestricted action spaces. Beginning with the simplification of flattening all actions, we theoretically explore the discrepancies between action-level optimization and this naive token-level optimization. We then derive the Bellman backup with Action Decomposition (BAD) to integrate credit assignments for both intra-action and inter-action tokens, effectively eliminating the discrepancies. Implementing BAD within the PPO algorithm, we introduce Policy Optimization with Action Decomposition (POAD). POAD benefits from a finer-grained credit assignment process and lower optimization complexity, leading to enhanced learning efficiency and generalization abilities in aligning language agents with interactive environments. We validate POAD across diverse testbeds, with results affirming the advantages of our approach and the correctness of our theoretical analysis. The source code can be accessed directly with this link: https://github.com/morning9393/ADRL.1d2:T52c,How can we build AI systems that can learn any set of individual human values both quickly and safely, avoiding causing harm or violating societal standards for acceptable behavior during the learning process? We explore the effects of representational alignment between humans and AI agents on learning human values. Making AI systems learn human-like representations of the world has many known benefits, including improving generalization, robustness to domain shifts, and few-shot learning performance. We demonstrate that this kind of representational alignment can also support safely learning and exploring human values in the context of personalization. We begin with a theoretical prediction, show that it applies to learning human morality judgments, then show that our results generalize to ten different aspects of human values -- including ethics, honesty, and fairness -- training AI agents on each set of values in a multi-armed bandit setting, where rewards reflect human value judgments over the chosen action. Using a set of textual action descriptions, we collect value judgments from humans, as well as similarity judgments from both humans and multiple language models, and demonstrate that representational alignment enables both safe exploration and improved generalization when learning human values.1d3:T793,With the remarkable achievements of large language models (LLMs), the demand for fine-tuning and deploying LLMs in various downstream tasks has garnered widespread interest. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning techniques represented by LoRA and model quantization techniques represented by GPTQ and AWQ are of paramount significance. However, although these techniques have been widely adopted in single-task scenarios, research is scarce in multi-task scenarios. To be specific, we find that mainstream quantization methods would prevent the base LLM from being shared among tasks, so current LLM serving systems are infeasible to integrate LLM quantization with multiple LoRA adapters to achieve memory-efficient multi-task serving. Moreover, existing LLM serving systems lack support for dynamic task addition and overlook the workload differences among tasks, leading to inefficiencies in multi-task scenarios.

This work proposes LoRA-Inlaid, an efficient multi-task LLM serving system. On the one hand, LoRA-Inlaid designs a flexible and efficient multi-task quantization algorithm (MLGPTQ) that facilitates the sharing of a single quantized model for multiple LoRA adapters, which significantly reduces the memory consumption for model deployment. Meanwhile, it supports adding LoRA adapters for new tasks on the fly, without sacrificing the stability of online services. On the other hand, LoRA-Inlaid develops a novel multi-task scheduling algorithm guided by output length prediction and grouping among different tasks, which effectively shrinks the memory consumption and avoids frequent switching of LoRA adapters. Empirical results verify that LoRA-Inlaid outperforms existing state-of-the-art LLM serving systems by up to 1.58 times in terms of throughput, 1.76 times in terms of average latency, 2 times in terms of job completion time, and 10 times in terms of SLO Attainment, while maintaining the same level of model quality.1d4:T58d,As the development and application of Large Language Models (LLMs) continue to advance rapidly, enhancing their trustworthiness and aligning them with human preferences has become a critical area of research. Traditional methods rely heavily on extensive data for Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF), but representation engineering offers a new, training-free approach. This technique leverages semantic features to control the representation of LLM's intermediate hidden states, enabling the model to meet specific requirements such as increased honesty or heightened safety awareness. However, a significant challenge arises when attempting to fulfill multiple requirements simultaneously. It proves difficult to encode various semantic contents, like honesty and safety, into a singular semantic feature, restricting its practicality. In this work, we address this issue through ``Sparse Activation Control''. By delving into the intrinsic mechanisms of LLMs, we manage to identify and pinpoint components that are closely related to specific tasks within the model, i.e., attention heads. These heads display sparse characteristics that allow for near-independent control over different tasks. Our experiments, conducted on the open-source Llama series models, have yielded encouraging results. The models were able to align with human preferences on issues of safety, factuality, and bias concurrently.1d5:T485,Existing image-text modality alignment in Vision Language Models (VLMs) treats each text token equally in an autoregressive manner. Despite being simple and effective, this method results in sub-optimal cross-modal alignment by over-emphasizing the text tokens that are less correlated with or even contradictory with the input images. In this paper, we advocate for assigning distinct contributions for each text token based on its visual correlation. Specifically, we present by contrasting image inputs, the difference in prediction logits on each text token provides strong guidance of visual correlation. We therefore introduce Contrastive ALignment (CAL), a simple yet effective re-weighting strategy that prioritizes training visually correlated tokens. Our experimental results demonstrate that CAL consistently improves different types of VLMs across different resolutions and model sizes on various benchmark datasets. Importantly, our method incurs minimal additional computational overhead, rendering it highly efficient compared to alternative data scaling strategies. Codes are available at https://github.com/foundation-multimodal-models/CAL.1d6:T4bb,While diffusion models can learn complex distributions, sampling requires a computationally expensive iterative process. Existing distillation methods enable efficient sampling, but have notable limitations, such as performance degradation with very few sampling steps, reliance on training data access, or mode-seeking optimization that may fail to capture the full distribution. We propose EM Distillation (EMD), a maximum likelihood-based approach that distills a diffusion model to a one-step generator model with minimal loss of perceptual quality. Our approach is derived through the lens of Expectation-Maximization (EM), where the generator parameters are updated using samples from the joint distribution of the diffusion teacher prior and inferred generator latents. We develop a reparametrized sampling scheme and a noise cancellation technique that together stabilizes the distillation process. We further reveal an interesting connection of our method with existing methods that minimize mode-seeking KL. EMD outperforms existing one-step generative methods in terms of FID scores on ImageNet-64 and ImageNet-128, and compares favorably with prior work on distilling text-to-image diffusion models.1d7:T59d,As machine learning (ML) models are increasingly used in social domains to make consequential decisions about humans, they often have the power to reshape data distributions. Humans, as strategic agents, continuously adapt their behaviors in response to the learning system. As populations change dynamically, ML systems may need frequent updates to ensure high performance. However, acquiring high-quality human-annotated samples can be highly challenging and even infeasible in social domains. A common practice to address this issue is using the model itself to annotate unlabeled data samples. This paper investigates the long-term impacts when ML models are retrained with model-annotated samples when they incorporate human strategic responses. We first formalize the interactions between strategic agents and the model and then analyze how they evolve under such dynamic interactions. We find that agents are increasingly likely to receive positive decisions as the model gets retrained, whereas the proportion of agents with positive labels may decrease over time. We thus propose a refined retraining process to stabilize the dynamics. Last, we examine how algorithmic fairness can be affected by these retraining processes and find that enforcing common fairness constraints at every round may not benefit the disadvantaged group in the long run. Experiments on (semi-)synthetic and real data validate the theoretical findings.1d8:T524,Although Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated significant capabilities in executing complex tasks in a zero-shot manner, they are susceptible to jailbreak attacks and can be manipulated to produce harmful outputs. Recently, a growing body of research has categorized jailbreak attacks into token-level and prompt-level attacks. However, previous work primarily overlooks the diverse key factors of jailbreak attacks, with most studies concentrating on LLM vulnerabilities and lacking exploration of defense-enhanced LLMs. To address these issues, we introduced $\textbf{JailTrickBench}$ to evaluate the impact of various attack settings on LLM performance and provide a baseline for jailbreak attacks, encouraging the adoption of a standardized evaluation framework. Specifically, we evaluate the eight key factors of implementing jailbreak attacks on LLMs from both target-level and attack-level perspectives. We further conduct seven representative jailbreak attacks on six defense methods across two widely used datasets, encompassing approximately 354 experiments with about 55,000 GPU hours on A800-80G. Our experimental results highlight the need for standardized benchmarking to evaluate these attacks on defense-enhanced LLMs. Our code is available at https://github.com/usail-hkust/JailTrickBench.1d9:T4db,Data point selection (DPS) is becoming a critical topic in deep learning due to the ease of acquiring uncurated training data compared to the difficulty of obtaining curated or processed data. Existing approaches to DPS are predominantly based on a bi-level optimisation (BLO) formulation, which is demanding in terms of memory and computation, and exhibits some theoretical defects regarding minibatches. Thus, we propose a novel Bayesian approach to DPS. We view the DPS problem as posterior inference in a novel Bayesian model where the posterior distributions of the instance-wise weights and the main neural network parameters are inferred under a reasonable prior and likelihood model. We employ stochastic gradient Langevin MCMC sampling to learn the main network and instance-wise weights jointly, ensuring convergence even with minibatches. Our update equation is comparable to the widely used SGD and much more efficient than existing BLO-based methods. Through controlled experiments in both the vision and language domains, we present the proof-of-concept. Additionally, we demonstrate that our method scales effectively to large language models and facilitates automated per-task optimization for instruction fine-tuning datasets.1da:T4be,Despite careful safety alignment, current large language models (LLMs) remain vulnerable to various attacks. To further unveil the safety risks of LLMs, we introduce a Safety Concept Activation Vector (SCAV) framework, which effectively guides the attacks by accurately interpreting LLMs' safety mechanisms. We then develop an SCAV-guided attack method that can generate both attack prompts and embedding-level attacks with automatically selected perturbation hyperparameters. Both automatic and human evaluations demonstrate that our attack method significantly improves the attack success rate and response quality while requiring less training data. Additionally, we find that our generated attack prompts may be transferable to GPT-4, and the embedding-level attacks may also be transferred to other white-box LLMs whose parameters are known. Our experiments further uncover the safety risks present in current LLMs. For example, in our evaluation of seven open-source LLMs, we observe an average attack success rate of 99.14%, based on the classic keyword-matching criterion. Finally, we provide insights into the safety mechanism of LLMs. The code is available at https://github.com/SproutNan/AI-Safety_SCAV.1db:T5a0,The rapid progress in Large Language Models (LLMs) poses potential risks such as generating unethical content. Assessing the values embedded in LLMs' generated responses can help expose their misalignment, but this relies on reference-free value evaluators, e.g. fine-tuned LLMs or closed-source models like GPT-4. Nevertheless, two key challenges emerge in open-ended value evaluation: the evaluator should adapt to changing human value definitions with minimal annotation, against their own bias (adaptability); and remain robust across varying value expressions and scenarios (generalizability). To handle these challenges, we introduce CLAVE, a novel framework that integrates two complementary LLMs: a large model to extract high-level value concepts from diverse responses, leveraging its extensive knowledge and generalizability, and a small model fine-tuned on these concepts to adapt to human value annotations. This dual-model framework enables adaptation to any value system using  <100 human-labeled samples per value type. We also present ValEval, a comprehensive dataset comprising 13k+ (text,value,label) tuples across diverse domains, covering three major value systems. We benchmark the performance of 15+ popular LLM evaluators and fully analyze their strengths and weaknesses. Our findings reveal that CLAVE combining a large prompt-based model and a small fine-tuned one serves as an optimal balance in value evaluation.1dc:T6c4,Vision Language Models (VLMs) excel in zero-shot image classification by pairing images with textual category names. The expanding variety of Pre-Trained VLMs enhances the likelihood of identifying a suitable VLM for specific tasks. To better reuse the VLM resource and fully leverage its potential on different zero-shot image classification tasks, a promising strategy is selecting appropriate Pre-Trained VLMs from the VLM Zoo, relying solely on the text data of the target dataset without access to the dataset’s images. In this paper, we analyze two inherent challenges in assessing the ability of a VLM in this Language-Only VLM selection: the “Modality Gap”—the disparity in VLM’s embeddings across two different modalities, making text a less reliable substitute for images; and the “Capability Gap”— the discrepancy between the VLM’s overall ranking and its ranking for target dataset, hindering direct prediction of a model’s dataset-specific performance from its general performance. We propose VLM Selection With gAp Bridging (SWAB) to mitigate the negative impact of two gaps. SWAB first adopts optimal transport to capture the relevance between open-source and target datasets with a transportation matrix. It then uses this matrix to transfer useful statistics of VLMs from open-source datasets to the target dataset for bridging two gaps. By bridging two gaps to obtain better substitutes for test images, SWAB can accurately predict the performance ranking of different VLMs on the target task without the need for the dataset’s images. Experiments across various VLMs and image classification datasets validate SWAB’s effectiveness. Code is available at: https://github.com/YCaigogogo/SWAB.1dd:T601,Recently, the strong latent Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DPM) has been applied to high-quality Text-to-Image (T2I) generation (e.g., Stable Diffusion), by injecting the encoded target text prompt into the gradually denoised diffusion image generator. Despite the success of DPM in practice, the mechanism behind it remains to be explored. To fill this blank, we begin by examining the intermediate statuses during the gradual denoising generation process in DPM. The empirical observations indicate, the shape of image is reconstructed after the first few denoising steps, and then the image is filled with details (e.g., texture). The phenomenon is because the low-frequency signal (shape relevant) of the noisy image is not corrupted until the final stage in the forward process (initial stage of generation) of adding noise in DPM. Inspired by the observations, we proceed to explore the influence of each token in the text prompt during the two stages. After a series of experiments of T2I generations conditioned on a set of text prompts. We conclude that in the earlier generation stage, the image is mostly decided by the special token [\texttt{EOS}] in the text prompt, and the information in the text prompt is already conveyed in this stage. After that, the diffusion model completes the details of generated images by information from themselves. Finally, we propose to apply this observation to accelerate the process of T2I generation by properly removing text guidance, which finally accelerates the sampling up to 25\%+.1de:T62c,In the rapidly evolving field of Large Language Models (LLMs), ensuring safety is a crucial and widely discussed topic. However, existing works often overlook the geo-diversity of cultural and legal standards across the world. To demonstrate the challenges posed by geo-diverse safety standards, we introduce SafeWorld, a novel benchmark specifically designed to evaluate LLMs' ability to generate responses that are not only helpful but also culturally sensitive and legally compliant across diverse global contexts. SafeWorld encompasses 2,342 test user queries, each grounded in high-quality, human-verified cultural norms and legal policies from 50 countries and 493 regions/races. On top of it, we propose a multi-dimensional automatic safety evaluation framework that assesses the contextual appropriateness, accuracy, and comprehensiveness of responses. Our evaluations reveal that current LLMs struggle to meet these criteria. To enhance LLMs' alignment with geo-diverse safety standards, we synthesize helpful preference pairs for Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) alignment training. The preference pair construction aims to encourage LLMs to behave appropriately and provide precise references to relevant cultural norms and policies when necessary. Our trained SafeWorldLM outperforms all competing models, including GPT-4o on all three evaluation dimensions by a large margin. Global human evaluators also note a nearly 20% higher winning rate in helpfulness and harmfulness evaluation. Our code and data can be found here: https://github.com/PlusLabNLP/SafeWorld.1df:T62b,Large language models (LLMs) have achieved impressive performance across various natural language benchmarks, prompting a continual need to curate more difficult datasets for larger LLMs, which is costly and time-consuming. In this paper, we propose to automate dataset updating and provide systematic analysis regarding its effectiveness in dealing with benchmark leakage issue, difficulty control, and stability. Thus, once the current benchmark has been mastered or leaked, we can update it for timely and reliable evaluation. There are two updating strategies: 1) mimicking strategy to generate similar samples based on original data, preserving stylistic and contextual essence, and 2) extending strategy that further expands existing samples at varying cognitive levels by adapting Bloom's taxonomy of educational objectives. Extensive experiments on updated MMLU and BIG-Bench demonstrate the stability of the proposed strategies and find that the mimicking strategy can effectively alleviate issues of overestimation from benchmark leakage. In cases where the efficient mimicking strategy fails, our extending strategy still shows promising results. Additionally, by controlling the difficulty, we can better discern the models' performance and enable fine-grained analysis neither too difficult nor too easy an exam can fairly judge students' learning status. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to automate updating benchmarks for reliable and timely evaluation. Our demo leaderboard can be found at https://yingjiahao14.github.io/Automating-DatasetUpdates/.1e0:T5c5,We present a maximum entropy inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) approach for improving the sample quality of diffusion generative models, especially when the number of generation time steps is small. Similar to how IRL trains a policy based on the reward function learned from expert demonstrations, we train (or fine-tune) a diffusion model using the log probability density estimated from training data. Since we employ an energy-based model (EBM) to represent the log density, our approach boils down to the joint training of a diffusion model and an EBM. Our IRL formulation, named Diffusion by Maximum Entropy IRL (DxMI), is a minimax problem that reaches equilibrium when both models converge to the data distribution. The entropy maximization plays a key role in DxMI, facilitating the exploration of the diffusion model and ensuring the convergence of the EBM. We also propose Diffusion by Dynamic Programming (DxDP), a novel reinforcement learning algorithm for diffusion models, as a subroutine in DxMI. DxDP makes the diffusion model update in DxMI efficient by transforming the original problem into an optimal control formulation where value functions replace back-propagation in time. Our empirical studies show that diffusion models fine-tuned using DxMI can generate high-quality samples in as few as 4 and 10 steps. Additionally, DxMI enables the training of an EBM without MCMC, stabilizing EBM training dynamics and enhancing anomaly detection performance.1e1:T467,Large language models (LLMs) typically utilize the top-k contexts from a retriever in retrieval-augmented generation (RAG). In this work, we propose a novel instruction fine-tuning framework RankRAG, which instruction-tunes a single LLM for the dual purpose of context ranking and answer generation in RAG. In particular, the instruction-tuned LLMs work surprisingly well by adding a small fraction of ranking data into the training blend, and outperform existing expert ranking models, including the same LLM exclusively fine-tuned on a large amount of ranking data. For generation, we compare our model with many strong baselines, including GPT-4-0613, GPT-4-turbo-2024-0409, and ChatQA-1.5, an open-sourced model with the state-of-the-art performance on RAG benchmarks. Specifically, our Llama3-RankRAG significantly outperforms Llama3-ChatQA-1.5 and GPT-4 models on nine knowledge-intensive benchmarks. In addition, it also performs comparably to GPT-4 on five RAG benchmarks in the biomedical domain without instruction fine-tuning on biomedical data, demonstrating its superb capability for generalization to new domains.1e2:T6c8,Zero-shot Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting emerges as a simple and effective strategy for enhancing the performance of large language models (LLMs) in real-world reasoning tasks. Nonetheless, the efficacy of a singular, task-level prompt uniformly applied across the whole of instances is inherently limited since one prompt cannot be a good partner for all, a more appropriate approach should consider the interaction between the prompt and each instance meticulously. This work introduces an instance-adaptive prompting algorithm as an alternative zero-shot CoT reasoning scheme by adaptively differentiating good and bad prompts. Concretely, we first employ analysis on LLMs through the lens of information flow to detect the mechanism under zero-shot CoT reasoning, in which we discover that information flows from question to prompt and question to rationale jointly influence the reasoning results most. We notice that a better zero-shot CoT reasoning needs the prompt to obtain semantic information from the question then the rationale aggregates sufficient information from the question directly and via the prompt indirectly. On the contrary, lacking any of those would probably lead to a bad one. Stem from that, we further propose an instance-adaptive prompting strategy (IAP) for zero-shot CoT reasoning. Experiments conducted with LLaMA-2, LLaMA-3, and Qwen on math, logic, and commonsense reasoning tasks (e.g., GSM8K, MMLU, Causal Judgement) obtain consistent improvement, demonstrating that the instance-adaptive zero-shot CoT prompting performs better than other task-level methods with some curated prompts or sophisticated procedures, showing the significance of our findings in the zero-shot CoT reasoning mechanism.1e3:T51c,While following different technical routes, both low-rank and orthogonal adaptation techniques can efficiently adapt large-scale pre-training models in specific tasks or domains based on a small piece of trainable parameters. In this study, we bridge the gap between these two techniques, proposing a simple but effective adaptation method based on Householder reflections. Given a pre-trained model, our method fine-tunes its layers by multiplying each frozen weight matrix with an orthogonal matrix constructed by a chain of learnable Householder reflections (HRs). This HR-based orthogonal fine-tuning is equivalent to an adaptive low-rank adaptation. Moreover, we show that the orthogonality of the reflection planes corresponding to the HRs impacts the model capacity and regularity. The analysis motivates us to regularize the orthogonality of the HRs, leading to different implementations of the proposed Householder reflection adaptation (HRA) method. Compared with state-of-the-art methods, HRA achieves superior performance with fewer learnable parameters when adapting large language models and conditional image generators. The code of the experiments is available at https://github.com/DaShenZi721/HRA, and the method has been merged into the [PEFT](https://github.com/huggingface/peft) package.1e4:T5ce,Current universal segmentation methods demonstrate strong capabilities in pixel-level image and video understanding. However, they lack reasoning abilities and cannot be controlled via text instructions. In contrast, large vision-language multimodal models exhibit powerful vision-based conversation and reasoning capabilities but lack pixel-level understanding and have difficulty accepting visual prompts for flexible user interaction. This paper proposes OMG-LLaVA, a new and elegant framework combining powerful pixel-level vision understanding with reasoning abilities. It can accept various visual and text prompts for flexible user interaction. Specifically, we use a universal segmentation method as the visual encoder, integrating image information, perception priors, and visual prompts into visual tokens provided to the LLM. The LLM is responsible for understanding the user's text instructions and providing text responses and pixel-level segmentation results based on the visual information. We propose perception prior embedding to better integrate perception priors with image features. OMG-LLaVA achieves image-level, object-level, and pixel-level reasoning and understanding in a single model, matching or surpassing the performance of specialized methods on multiple benchmarks. Rather than using LLM to connect each specialist, our work aims at end-to-end training on one encoder, one decoder, and one LLM. The code and model have been released for further research.1e5:T54c,Foundational Vision-Language models such as CLIP have exhibited impressive generalization in downstream tasks. However, CLIP suffers from a two-level misalignment issue, i.e., task misalignment and data misalignment, when adapting to specific tasks. Soft prompt tuning has mitigated the task misalignment, yet the data misalignment remains a challenge. To analyze the impacts of the data misalignment, we revisit the pre-training and adaptation processes of CLIP and develop a structural causal model. We discover that while we expect to capture task-relevant information for downstream tasks accurately, the task-irrelevant knowledge impacts the prediction results and hampers the modeling of the true relationships between the images and the predicted classes. As task-irrelevant knowledge is unobservable, we leverage the front-door adjustment and propose Causality-Guided Semantic Decoupling and Classification (CDC) to mitigate the interference of task-irrelevant knowledge. Specifically, we decouple semantics contained in the data of downstream tasks and perform classification based on each semantic. Furthermore, we employ the Dempster-Shafer evidence theory to evaluate the uncertainty of each prediction generated by diverse semantics. Experiments conducted in multiple different settings have consistently demonstrated the effectiveness of CDC.1e6:T55b,Image classification is one of the most fundamental capabilities of machine vision intelligence. In this work, we revisit the image classification task using visually-grounded language models (VLMs) such as GPT-4V and LLaVA. We find that existing proprietary and public VLMs, despite often using CLIP as a vision encoder and having many more parameters, significantly underperform CLIP on standard image classification benchmarks like ImageNet. To understand the reason, we explore several hypotheses concerning the inference algorithms, training objectives, and data processing in VLMs. Our analysis reveals that the primary cause is data-related: critical information for image classification is encoded in the VLM's latent space but can only be effectively decoded with enough training data. Specifically, there is a strong correlation between the frequency of class exposure during VLM training and instruction-tuning and the VLM's performance in those classes; when trained with sufficient data, VLMs can match the accuracy of state-of-the-art classification models. Based on these findings, we enhance a VLM by integrating classification-focused datasets into its training, and demonstrate that the enhanced classification performance of the VLM transfers to its general capabilities, resulting in an improvement of 11.8% on the newly collected ImageWikiQA dataset.1e7:T472,Since the rapid development of Large Language Models (LLMs) has achieved remarkable success, understanding and rectifying their internal complex mechanisms has become an urgent issue. Recent research has attempted to interpret their behaviors through the lens of inner representation. However, developing practical and efficient methods for applying these representations for general and flexible model editing remains challenging. In this work, we explore how to leverage insights from representation engineering to guide the editing of LLMs by deploying a representation discriminator as an editing oracle. We first identify the importance of a robust and reliable discriminator during editing, then propose an \textbf{A}dversarial \textbf{R}epresentation \textbf{E}ngineering (\textbf{ARE}) framework to provide a unified and interpretable approach for conceptual model editing without compromising baseline performance. Experiments on multiple tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of ARE in various model editing scenarios. Our code and data are available at \url{https://github.com/Zhang-Yihao/Adversarial-Representation-Engineering}.1e8:T526,A mainstream of Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have two essential functions, i.e., visual recognition (e.g., grounding) and understanding (e.g., visual question answering). Presently, all these MLLMs integrate visual recognition and understanding in a same sequential manner in the LLM head, i.e., generating the response token-by-token for both recognition and understanding. We think unifying them in the same sequential manner is not optimal for two reasons: 1) parallel recognition is more efficient than sequential recognition and is actually prevailing in deep visual recognition, and 2) the recognition results can be integrated to help high-level cognition (while the current manner does not). Such motivated, this paper proposes a novel “parallel recognition → sequential understanding” framework for MLLMs. The bottom LLM layers are utilized for parallel recognition and the recognition results are relayed into the top LLM layers for sequential understanding. Specifically, parallel recognition in the bottom LLM layers is implemented via object queries, a popular mechanism in DEtection TRansformer, which we find to harmonize well with the LLM layers. Empirical studies show our MLLM named Octopus improves accuracy on popular MLLM tasks and is up to 5× faster on visual grounding tasks.1e9:T49a,Do machines and humans process language in similar ways? Recent research has hinted at the affirmative, showing that human neural activity can be effectively predicted using the internal representations of language models (LMs). Although such results are thought to reflect shared computational principles between LMs and human brains, there are also clear differences in how LMs and humans represent and use language. In this work, we systematically explore the divergences between human and machine language processing by examining the differences between LM representations and human brain responses to language as measured by Magnetoencephalography (MEG) across two datasets in which subjects read and listened to narrative stories. Using an LLM-based data-driven approach, we identify two domains that LMs do not capture well: social/emotional intelligence and physical commonsense. We validate these findings with human behavioral experiments and hypothesize that the gap is due to insufficient representations of social/emotional and physical knowledge in LMs. Our results show that fine-tuning LMs on these domains can improve their alignment with human brain responses.1ea:T414,We introduce SELF-DISCOVER, a general framework for LLMs to self-discover the task-intrinsic reasoning structures to tackle complex reasoning problems that are challenging for typical prompting methods. Core to the framework is a self-discovery process where LLMs select multiple atomic reasoning modules such as critical thinking and step-by-step thinking, and compose them into an explicit reasoning structure for LLMs to follow during decoding. SELF-DISCOVER substantially improves GPT-4 and PaLM 2's performance on challenging reasoning benchmarks such as BigBench-Hard, grounded agent reasoning, and MATH, by as much as 32% compared to Chain of Thought (CoT). Furthermore, SELF-DISCOVER outperforms inference-intensive methods such as CoT-Self-Consistency by more than 20%, while requiring 10-40x fewer inference compute. Finally, we show that the self-discovered reasoning structures are universally applicable across model families: from PaLM 2-L to GPT-4, and from GPT-4 to Llama2, and share commonalities with human reasoning patterns.1eb:T64b,This paper investigates an under-explored challenge in large language models (LLMs): chain-of-thought prompting with noisy rationales, which include irrelevant or inaccurate reasoning thoughts within examples used for in-context learning. We construct NoRa dataset that is tailored to evaluate the robustness of reasoning in the presence of noisy rationales. Our findings on NoRa dataset reveal a prevalent vulnerability to such noise among current LLMs, with existing robust methods like self-correction and self-consistency showing limited efficacy. Notably, compared to prompting with clean rationales, base LLM drops by 1.4%-19.8% in accuracy with irrelevant thoughts and more drastically by 2.2%-40.4% with inaccurate thoughts.

Addressing this challenge necessitates external supervision that should be accessible in practice. Here, we propose the method of contrastive denoising with noisy chain-of-thought (CD-CoT). It enhances LLMs' denoising-reasoning capabilities by contrasting noisy rationales with only one clean rationale, which can be the minimal requirement for denoising-purpose prompting. This method follows a principle of exploration and exploitation: (1) rephrasing and selecting rationales in the input space to achieve explicit denoising and (2) exploring diverse reasoning paths and voting on answers in the output space. Empirically, CD-CoT demonstrates an average improvement of 17.8% in accuracy over the base model and shows significantly stronger denoising capabilities than baseline methods. The source code is publicly available at: https://github.com/tmlr-group/NoisyRationales.1ec:T5ee,Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities across a range of scientific tasks including mathematics, physics, and chemistry. Despite their successes, the effectiveness of LLMs in handling complex statistical tasks remains systematically under-explored. To bridge this gap, we introduce StatQA, a new benchmark designed for statistical analysis tasks. StatQA comprises 11,623 examples tailored to evaluate LLMs' proficiency in specialized statistical tasks and their applicability assessment capabilities, particularly for hypothesis testing methods. We systematically experiment with representative LLMs using various prompting strategies and show that even state-of-the-art models such as GPT-4o achieve a best performance of only 64.83%, indicating significant room for improvement. Notably, while open-source LLMs (e.g. LLaMA-3) show limited capability, those fine-tuned ones exhibit marked improvements, outperforming all in-context learning-based methods (e.g. GPT-4o). Moreover, our comparative human experiments highlight a striking contrast in error types between LLMs and humans: LLMs primarily make applicability errors, whereas humans mostly make statistical task confusion errors. This divergence highlights distinct areas of proficiency and deficiency, suggesting that combining LLM and human expertise could lead to complementary strengths, inviting further investigation into their collaborative potential. Our source code and data are available at https://statqa.github.io/.1ed:T4c3,The sparsely activated mixture of experts (MoE) model presents a promising alternative to traditional densely activated (dense) models, enhancing both quality and computational efficiency. However, training MoE models from scratch demands extensive data and computational resources. Moreover, public repositories like timm mainly provide pre-trained dense checkpoints, lacking similar resources for MoE models, hindering their adoption. To bridge this gap, we introduce MoE Jetpack, an effective method for fine-tuning dense checkpoints into MoE models. MoE Jetpack incorporates two key techniques: (1) checkpoint recycling, which repurposes dense checkpoints as initial weights for MoE models, thereby accelerating convergence, enhancing accuracy, and alleviating the computational burden of pre-training; (2) hyperspherical adaptive MoE (SpheroMoE) layer, which optimizes the MoE architecture for better integration of dense checkpoints, enhancing fine-tuning performance. Our experiments on vision tasks demonstrate that MoE Jetpack significantly improves convergence speed and accuracy when fine-tuning dense checkpoints into MoE models. Our code will be publicly available at https://github.com/Adlith/MoE-Jetpack.1ee:T47b,Text-to-image diffusion models particularly Stable Diffusion, have revolutionized the field of computer vision. However, the synthesis quality often deteriorates when asked to generate images that faithfully represent complex prompts involving multiple attributes and objects. While previous studies suggest that blended text embeddings lead to improper attribute binding, few have explored this in depth. In this work, we critically examine the limitations of the CLIP text encoder in understanding attributes and investigate how this affects diffusion models. We discern a phenomenon of attribute bias in the text space and highlight a contextual issue in padding embeddings that entangle different concepts. We propose \textbf{Magnet}, a novel training-free approach to tackle the attribute binding problem. We introduce positive and negative binding vectors to enhance disentanglement, further with a neighbor strategy to increase accuracy. Extensive experiments show that Magnet significantly improves synthesis quality and binding accuracy with negligible computational cost, enabling the generation of unconventional and unnatural concepts.1ef:T6cc,As the key component in multimodal large language models (MLLMs), the ability of the visual encoder greatly affects MLLM's understanding on diverse image content. Although some large-scale pretrained vision encoders such as vision encoders in CLIP and DINOv2 have brought promising performance, we found that there is still no single vision encoder that can dominate various image content understanding, e.g., the CLIP vision encoder leads to outstanding results on general image understanding but poor performance on document or chart content. To alleviate the bias of CLIP vision encoder, we first delve into the inherent behavior of different pre-trained vision encoders and then propose the MoVA, a powerful and novel MLLM, adaptively routing and fusing task-specific vision experts with a coarse-to-fine mechanism. In the coarse-grained stage, we design a context-aware expert routing strategy to dynamically select the most suitable vision experts according to the user instruction, input image, and expertise of vision experts. This benefits from the powerful model function understanding ability of the large language model (LLM). In the fine-grained stage, we elaborately conduct the mixture-of-vision-expert adapter (MoV-Adapter) to extract and fuse task-specific knowledge from various experts. This coarse-to-fine paradigm effectively leverages representations from experts based on multimodal context and model expertise, further enhancing the generalization ability. We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed approach. Without any bells and whistles, MoVA can achieve significant performance gains over current state-of-the-art methods in a wide range of challenging multimodal benchmarks.0:{"rsc":["$","$1","c",{"children":[["$","div",null,{"className":"mx-auto max-w-5xl px-4 py-8","children":["$","$L2",null,{"data":{"venue":"NeurIPS","venue_slug":"neurips-2024","year":2024,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","generated_at":"2026-04-18T21:58:15.480882+00:00","stats":{"total_fetched":4561,"total_relevant":576,"by_award":{"poster":505,"spotlight":59,"oral":12},"by_category":{"llm_pretrain":84,"mechanism":163,"efficient":77,"post_train":128,"multimodal":68,"multimodal_gen":33,"agent":15,"coding_agent":7,"industry":1},"by_track":{"datasets_benchmarks":50,"main":526}},"papers":[{"id":"2406.11794","title":"DataComp-LM: In search of the next generation of training sets for language models","authors":["Jeffrey Li","Alex Fang","Georgios Smyrnis","Maor Ivgi","Matt Jordan","Samir Yitzhak Gadre","Hritik Bansal","Etash Kumar Guha","Sedrick Scott Keh","Kushal Arora","Saurabh Garg","Rui Xin","Niklas Muennighoff","Reinhard Heckel","Jean Mercat","Mayee F. Chen","Suchin Gururangan","Mitchell Wortsman","Alon Albalak","Yonatan Bitton","Marianna Nezhurina","Amro Abbas","Cheng-Yu Hsieh","Dhruba Ghosh","Josh Gardner","Maciej Kilian","Hanlin Zhang","Rulin Shao","Sarah M. Pratt","Sunny Sanyal"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11794","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiFSIJGBGKAGXMH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiFSIJGBGKAGXMH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/19e4ea30dded58259665db375885e412-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":10,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的核心问题是：语言模型训练集到底该怎么系统地做数据筛选、去重和混合，才能在可控实验框架下找到“下一代训练集”的更优配方。过去数据工作常见两种问题：一是语料、训练 recipe、评测集都不统一，导致方法很难公平比较；二是许多经验结论只在单一模型规模或私有数据上成立，外部很难复现。","importance":"这篇工作的重要性很高，主要体现在数据基础设施和基线层。它提供了一个 240T token 的 Common Crawl 标准化语料、OpenLM 训练配方和 53 项下游评测，实质上把 DataComp 范式从视觉搬到了语言模型。对 pretrain 研究者来说，最大价值不是某一个筛选器本身，而是终于有了一个可复用的 testbed 来比较 data curation 策略。摘要里的一个强结论也值得重视：model-based filtering 是高质量训练集的关键，这直接影响我们如何看待低成本启发式规则的上限。","technical_approach":"核心方法不是单个新算法，而是搭建 DCLM 基准，并在其上系统比较 deduplication、filtering、data mixing 等策略，在 412M 到 7B 参数规模上跑受控实验。作者自己的 baseline 结论是采用 model-based filtering 组装高质量训练集，并形成 DCLM-Baseline 数据集。这个设计有效的原因很直接：数据研究最怕 confounder，统一原始池、训练 recipe 和 eval suite 后，数据处理策略的真实贡献才更容易显现。和过去“私有数据 + 单模型结果”式论文相比，这篇更像为整个领域修地基。","experiments":"摘要给出了一组很关键的数字：DCLM 提供 240T tokens 的标准语料，覆盖 412M 到 7B 参数的训练尺度，以及 53 个下游评测。作者的 baseline 数据集可支持从头训练 7B 模型，在 MMLU 5-shot 上达到 64%，且只用 2.6T tokens。这个结果的含义不是单点 SOTA，而是说明高质量筛选后，数据效率可以显著提升。值得进一步关注的 ablation 是：model-based filtering 相比启发式过滤提升多少；dedup 和 mixing 与过滤之间是否存在交互；以及最优策略是否随模型规模变化。如果最优配方跨尺度稳定，这会成为很强的实践参考。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a foundational question: how should LM training data be filtered, deduplicated, and mixed if we want controlled, reproducible progress on dataset quality? Prior data studies often suffer from inconsistent corpora, recipes, and evaluations, making it hard to tell whether a reported gain comes from the curation strategy or from everything else changing at once.","importance":"This is a high-value infrastructure paper for pretraining. It effectively brings the DataComp philosophy to language models by standardizing the raw pool, training recipe, and evaluation suite. The practical takeaway is already strong: model-based filtering appears to be central for assembling high-quality LM training sets. That matters because it shifts attention away from purely heuristic cleaning rules toward learned quality estimation at scale.","technical_approach":"The contribution is a benchmark and testbed rather than a single algorithm. DCLM provides a standardized 240T-token Common Crawl corpus, OpenLM-based training recipes, and 53 downstream evaluations, enabling controlled comparisons of deduplication, filtering, and data mixing across models from 412M to 7B parameters. The authors also provide a baseline curation pipeline built around model-based filtering. The design is effective because it removes major confounders that usually make data curation results hard to trust or reproduce.","experiments":"The abstract includes several important numbers: 240T standardized tokens, model scales from 412M to 7B, and 53 downstream evaluations. Their DCLM-Baseline dataset supports training a 7B model from scratch to 64% 5-shot MMLU using 2.6T tokens. The point is not just the absolute score, but the data-efficiency implication: careful filtering can materially improve the utility of web-scale text. The key ablations to inspect are how much model-based filtering beats heuristic filtering, how it interacts with deduplication and mixing, and whether the best strategy changes with model scale.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-quality","pretraining-data","scaling-law","benchmark","data-curation"],"keywords":["language models","data comp","datacomp","dataset design","data-centric AI","data-centric benchmarks","benchmarks","data curation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"把“数据清洗玄学”变成可控 testbed；会改变我对 heuristic 过滤上限的 prior，建议立刻用其 recipe 复跑内部数据 ablation。","en":"Turns data curation from vibes into a controlled testbed; it should update your prior on heuristic filtering ceilings—worth immediately replaying your internal data ablations with their recipe."}},{"id":"PenedoKALMRW024","title":"The FineWeb Datasets: Decanting the Web for the Finest Text Data at Scale","authors":["Guilherme Penedo","Hynek Kydlícek","Loubna Ben Allal","Anton Lozhkov","Margaret Mitchell","Colin A. Raffel","Leandro von Werra","Thomas Wolf"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PenedoKALMRW024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PenedoKALMRW024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/370df50ccfdf8bde18f8f9c2d9151bda-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":10,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：通用 Web 语料在规模上足够但噪声、重复与低质内容严重，导致预训练算力被“无效 token”吞噬，而现有清洗流程往往不可复现或只在小规模上验证。","importance":"这是数据级、对 pretrain 影响很大的工作：FineWeb 把“可复现的大规模高质量 Web 文本蒸馏”产品化，直接影响训练 loss、下游能力、以及 scaling law 中“数据质量系数”的可控性。","technical_approach":"FineWeb 的核心是从大规模 Web 抓取中进行分层过滤与去重，目标是最大化信息密度并降低污染：通常包括规则/模型结合的质量过滤（垃圾、模板、成人/暴力等）、近重复与跨站重复去除、语言识别与域名/来源控制，以及面向训练的分片与元数据记录以保证可复现。关键取舍在于：过滤越强质量越高但多样性与长尾会下降；去重越激进越能提升有效 token，但可能删掉“有用的多视角复述”；以及过滤器的偏置会改变数据分布，从而改变模型行为（例如更“书面化”但更少口语/论坛推理）。","experiments":"题目与摘要未给出具体规模与对比数字（例如总 token、保留比例、与 C4/RefinedWeb 等对比的 perplexity/下游提升），因此无法在这里量化其“质量-多样性-覆盖面”的最优点与对不同模型规模的收益曲线。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a core pretraining bottleneck: web-scale corpora are large but heavily noisy and duplicated, wasting compute on low-value tokens, while many cleaning pipelines are not reproducible or only validated at small scale.","importance":"This is a high-impact data contribution: FineWeb operationalizes reproducible, large-scale distillation of high-quality web text, directly affecting training loss, downstream capability, and how controllable “data quality” is in scaling behavior.","technical_approach":"FineWeb focuses on multi-stage filtering and deduplication over massive web crawls to maximize information density and reduce contamination. Typical components include rule/model-based quality filters (spam/templates/unsafe content), near-duplicate and cross-site dedup, language/source controls, and training-oriented sharding with metadata for reproducibility. The key trade-offs are that stronger filtering can reduce diversity and long-tail coverage; aggressive dedup can remove useful paraphrastic variation; and filter bias shifts the data distribution, which can systematically change model behavior.","experiments":"No concrete numbers are provided here (total tokens, retention rates, comparisons to C4/RefinedWeb, perplexity/downstream deltas), so the quality–diversity optimum and scaling-dependent gains cannot be quantified from the given metadata.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-quality","web-data","data-filtering","scaling"],"notable_authors":["Guilherme Penedo","Hynek Kydlícek","Loubna Ben Allal","Anton Lozhkov","Margaret Mitchell"],"keywords":["dataset","pretraining","web data","machine learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"更像可复用的数据产品而非论文：直接拿来当 Web 数据基线/对照组；细读去重与过滤阈值那几节，其余当文档查。","en":"More a reusable data product than a paper: adopt it as your web-data baseline/control; read the dedup + filtering-threshold sections, treat the rest as reference docs."}},{"id":"WeberFAOAALNYAA24","title":"RedPajama: an Open Dataset for Training Large Language Models","authors":["Maurice Weber","Daniel Y. Fu","Quentin Anthony","Yonatan Oren","Shane Adams","Anton Alexandrov","Xiaozhong Lyu","Huu Nguyen","Xiaozhe Yao","Virginia Adams","Ben Athiwaratkun","Rahul Chalamala","Kezhen Chen","Max Ryabinin","Tri Dao","Percy Liang","Christopher Ré","Irina Rish","Ce Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WeberFAOAALNYAA24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WeberFAOAALNYAA24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d34497330b1fd6530f7afd86d0df9f76-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"闭源大模型的训练数据集制作流程不透明、高质量公开预训练数据稀缺，此前开源模型普遍使用无完整公开元数据的自制数据集，阻碍了可复现的开源LLM研发。","importance":"数据级贡献，公开了全流程透明、附带完整元数据的大规模开源LLM预训练数据集，为预训练数据配比、过滤、质量评估等方向的研究提供了可复现的基准数据源，填补了开源社区缺少全透明大规模预训练数据集的空白。","technical_approach":"数据工程方案，明确数据集构建三大核心原则（流程全透明、数据质量可控、完整元数据留存），覆盖多数据源的清洗、去重、过滤全流程，公开所有处理脚本和中间版本数据集快照。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露数据集规模、构成比例及配套基线模型训练的量化实验结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Closed-source LLMs lack transparency in training data curation pipelines, and high-quality public pre-training data is scarce. Prior open-source models mostly use custom datasets without full public metadata, hindering reproducible open LLM research.","importance":"Data-level contribution. It releases a large-scale open LLM pre-training dataset with fully transparent workflows and complete metadata, provides a reproducible benchmark data source for pre-training data ratio, filtering and quality assessment research, and fills the gap of fully transparent large-scale pre-training datasets in the open-source community.","technical_approach":"Data engineering solution. It defines three core principles for dataset construction (full process transparency, controllable data quality, full metadata retention), covers cleaning, deduplication and filtering pipelines for multiple data sources, and opens all processing scripts and intermediate dataset snapshots.","experiments":"No quantifiable data on dataset scale, composition ratio or supporting baseline model training results are disclosed in the provided abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pretraining-data","open-dataset","data-quality","data-curation"],"keywords":["large language models","pretraining data","data quality"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大模型预训练数据的质量和处理流程直接决定模型最终性能","claim_en":"The quality and processing pipeline of LLM pre-training data directly determines the final performance of the model","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"会直接改变我对“开源预训练数据不可复现”的 prior；做数据配比、过滤、去重研究时应优先拿它做 internal ablation 基线，而不是再用来路不明的混合料。","en":"This changes my prior that open pretraining data must be irreproducible; if you study mixture, filtering, or dedup, use this as the default internal ablation bed instead of another opaque crawl soup."}},{"id":"Alabdulmohsin0024","title":"Fractal Patterns May Illuminate the Success of Next-Token Prediction","authors":["Ibrahim M. Alabdulmohsin","Vinh Q. Tran","Mostafa Dehghani"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Alabdulmohsin0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Alabdulmohsin0024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/cd004fa45fc1fe5c0218b7801d98d036-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：为什么 next-token prediction 这种看起来很局部的训练目标，能学出远超局部匹配的泛化与结构能力。过去对此的解释多半来自经验成功、信息论直觉或 scaling law 观察，但缺少一种能把自然数据结构和训练目标联系起来的更具体图景；作者尝试用分形模式来解释。","importance":"这属于范式理解层面的工作。它未必直接改进训练配方，但对 pretrain 研究很有价值，因为它试图解释 AR 目标为何如此强，以及这种成功是否依赖于数据的自相似结构；如果这个解释成立，它会影响我们如何看待 token 粒度、上下文长度和非 AR 替代目标。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把语言或序列数据中的层级自相似性，与 next-token prediction 的学习机制建立联系。作者的论点大概率是：若数据在不同尺度上都呈现可压缩、可递归利用的模式，那么局部条件预测就能逐层吸收更大结构，而不是只学 n-gram 式表面统计。它和纯经验性 scaling 解释的不同，在于试图给出结构性原因；边界则是，分形类比是否足够贴合真实语料、能否产生可验证预测，决定了这套解释的实际价值。","experiments":"没有摘要和结果，无法确认作者使用了理论分析、合成数据、真实语料还是三者结合。若论文成立，最有价值的实验通常会是：在具有不同自相似程度的合成/真实序列上，next-token prediction 的学习效率和泛化能力出现系统差异，并与提出的分形指标相关；但具体模型规模和数字目前无法可靠给出。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks why next-token prediction, a seemingly local objective, can produce models with rich long-range structure and broad generalization. Existing explanations are often empirical or information-theoretic, but still fairly high-level; this work appears to connect the success of autoregressive training to fractal or self-similar patterns in data.","importance":"This is a paradigm-understanding contribution. It may not change training recipes immediately, but it is relevant to pretraining because it speaks to why autoregressive objectives work so well in the first place, and under what data conditions their advantages should persist or weaken.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to relate hierarchical self-similarity in sequences to the learning dynamics of next-token prediction. If structure repeats across scales, then local conditional prediction can accumulate non-local regularities instead of stopping at shallow statistics. That is the main distinction from purely empirical scaling arguments: it proposes a structural reason rather than just observing that AR works. The limitation is whether the fractal view yields testable predictions on real corpora rather than only an appealing analogy.","experiments":"The prompt does not provide the abstract, so I cannot verify whether the evidence is theoretical, synthetic, empirical, or all three. The most convincing experiments, if present, would show that AR training performs differently as self-similarity in the data changes, and that these effects line up with the proposed fractal characterization.","authors_note":""},"tags":["next-token-prediction","fractal","language-modeling","theory"],"keywords":["fractal patterns","large language models","Hurst exponent","self-similarity","Joseph exponent","perplexity","information theory"],"recommendation":{"zh":"解释味很强但可证伪点不多；当作“为何 AR 有效”的新心智模型即可，重点看它提出的可检验预测是否真能落到实验。","en":"Heavy on explanation with limited falsifiability; use it as a fresh mental model for why AR works, and focus on whether its purported testable predictions actually map to experiments."}},{"id":"HoBEG0RATS24","title":"Algorithmic progress in language models","authors":["Anson Ho","Tamay Besiroglu","Ege Erdil","Zifan Carl Guo","David Owen","Robi Rahman","David Atkinson","Neil Thompson","Jaime Sevilla"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HoBEG0RATS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HoBEG0RATS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/6b066da6a23bc55f9b887e7298102884-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"此前大模型性能提升的来源被普遍归因于硬件算力和模型规模scaling，训练算法的迭代速率及其对性能的贡献占比未被量化评估，缺少跨10年以上的统一基准统计。","importance":"范式级贡献，量化了2012-2023年LLM预训练算法的进步速率，修正了此前对scaling law中算力、算法贡献占比的认知，为算法迭代的ROI评估提供了基准数据。","technical_approach":"统计分析方法，收集2012-2023年共200多个LLM在Wikitext和Penn Treebank上的评测结果，拟合加入算法进步因子的扩展scaling law，拆分算力和算法对性能提升的贡献。","experiments":"基于200+模型的评测数据统计，达到固定性能阈值所需的算力每8个月减半（90%置信区间2-22个月），速率远高于摩尔定律的硬件进步速度；Transformer架构推出后算法进步速率未出现显著跳变。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Previous LLM performance improvements are generally attributed to hardware compute and model scaling. The iteration rate of training algorithms and their contribution to performance have not been quantitatively evaluated, and there is no unified benchmark statistics spanning more than 10 years.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution. It quantifies the progress rate of LLM pre-training algorithms from 2012 to 2023, corrects previous understanding of the contribution ratio of compute and algorithms in scaling laws, and provides benchmark data for ROI evaluation of algorithm iteration.","technical_approach":"Statistical analysis method. It collects evaluation results of more than 200 LLMs on Wikitext and Penn Treebank from 2012 to 2023, fits an extended scaling law with algorithm progress factors, and splits the contribution of compute and algorithms to performance improvement.","experiments":"Based on statistical data of 200+ model evaluations, the compute required to reach a fixed performance threshold halves every 8 months (90% confidence interval 2-22 months), much faster than the hardware progress rate of Moore's Law; no significant jump in algorithm progress rate is observed after the introduction of Transformer architecture.","authors_note":""},"tags":["scaling-law","algorithmic-efficiency","language-models","training"],"keywords":["Natural Language Processing"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"scaling law下大模型性能与训练算力投入呈正相关","claim_en":"LLM performance is positively correlated with training compute investment under scaling laws","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"2012-2023年预训练算法进步带来的算力效率提升速率远高于摩尔定律的硬件进步速率","claim_en":"The compute efficiency improvement brought by pre-training algorithm progress from 2012 to 2023 is much faster than the hardware progress rate of Moore's Law","opposes":"Prior work generally assumes that the main source of LLM performance improvement is hardware compute scaling, and the contribution of algorithm progress is far smaller than hardware","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3.2, Table 1","why_contested":"If the conclusion holds, the ROI of algorithm research and development will be much higher than hardware compute investment, which has a significant impact on industry resource allocation direction"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"会修正“进步主要来自算力和规模”的口头叙事，但证据毕竟是跨年代 benchmark 拼接统计；适合拿来校准算法 ROI 预期，不适合当因果结论硬用。","en":"Useful for correcting the lazy story that gains mostly came from scale and hardware, but the evidence is still stitched-together historical benchmarking; good for ROI calibration, not strong causal claims."}},{"id":"2404.08801","title":"Megalodon: Efficient LLM Pretraining and Inference with Unlimited Context Length","authors":["Xuezhe Ma","Xiaomeng Yang","Wenhan Xiong","Beidi Chen","Lili Yu","Hao Zhang","Jonathan May","Luke Zettlemoyer","Omer Levy","Chunting Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$8","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.08801","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MaYXCY0MZLZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MaYXCY0MZLZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/840abfadd04c967feaa2a49aba94a32d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer的自注意力二次复杂度和弱长度外推性限制了长序列建模，现有次复杂度方案（线性注意力、SSM）在预训练效率和下游任务精度上普遍弱于同规模Transformer，无法直接替代。","importance":"架构级贡献，提出了可无限扩展上下文长度的新架构，同时保持了和Transformer相当的预训练效率和下游精度，为长上下文LLM的预训练和推理提供了新的可行路线。","technical_approach":"架构改进方案，在Mega架构（指数移动平均+门控注意力）基础上，新增4个核心组件：复数指数移动平均(CEMA)、时间步归一化层、归一化注意力机制、双跳残差前置归一化配置，解决了原Mega架构训练不稳定和长序列建模能力不足的问题。","experiments":"公开摘要仅披露在对照实验中，Megalodon预训练效率和短上下文精度匹配同规模Transformer，长序列任务性能优于现有次复杂度架构，未给出具体量化指标。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The quadratic complexity of Transformer self-attention and weak length extrapolation limit long-sequence modeling. Existing sub-quadratic solutions (linear attention, SSM) generally underperform Transformers of the same scale in pre-training efficiency and downstream task accuracy, so they cannot be directly substituted.","importance":"Architecture-level contribution. It proposes a new architecture with unlimited context length scaling capability, while maintaining pre-training efficiency and downstream accuracy comparable to Transformers, providing a new feasible route for pre-training and inference of long-context LLMs.","technical_approach":"Architecture improvement solution. Based on the Mega architecture (exponential moving average + gated attention), 4 core components are added: complex exponential moving average (CEMA), timestep normalization layer, normalized attention mechanism, and pre-norm with two-hop residual configuration, solving the problems of training instability and insufficient long-sequence modeling capability of the original Mega architecture.","experiments":"The provided abstract only discloses that in controlled experiments, Megalodon matches the pre-training efficiency and short-context accuracy of Transformers of the same scale, and outperforms existing sub-quadratic architectures on long-sequence tasks, no specific quantitative indicators are given.","authors_note":""},"tags":["architecture","long-context","sub-quadratic","pretraining","scaling"],"keywords":["Mega","Efficient Architecture","Long Sequence Modeling","Unlimited Context Length"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"次复杂度架构的核心瓶颈是预训练效率和下游精度弱于同规模Transformer","claim_en":"The core bottleneck of sub-quadratic architectures is that their pre-training efficiency and downstream accuracy are weaker than Transformers of the same scale","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"Megalodon架构可同时实现无限上下文长度、与Transformer相当的预训练效率和短/长上下文精度","claim_en":"Megalodon architecture can achieve unlimited context length, pre-training efficiency and short/long context accuracy comparable to Transformers at the same time","opposes":"Prior work assumes that sub-quadratic architectures have to sacrifice short-context accuracy to obtain better long-sequence performance","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4.1, Table 2","why_contested":"If the conclusion is reproducible, sub-quadratic architectures can directly replace Transformers as the base architecture for general LLMs, subverting the current architecture selection logic"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"少数让我愿意认真更新“长上下文必须在 Transformer 上修补”的 prior 的架构文；应立刻在内部复现其稳定性 recipe，先验证训练曲线是否真像文中那样干净。","en":"One of the few papers that actually updates my prior that long-context work must stay in the Transformer patching regime; I’d immediately reproduce the stability recipe and check whether the training curves are really that clean."}},{"id":"PorianWJSC24","title":"Resolving Discrepancies in Compute-Optimal Scaling of Language Models","authors":["Tomer Porian","Mitchell Wortsman","Jenia Jitsev","Ludwig Schmidt","Yair Carmon"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Kaplan et al. and Hoffmann et al. developed influential scaling laws for the optimal model size as a function of the compute budget, but these laws yield substantially different predictions. We explain the discrepancy by reproducing the Kaplan scaling law on two datasets (OpenWebText2 and RefinedWeb) and identifying three factors causing the difference: last layer computational cost, warmup duration, and scale-dependent optimizer tuning. With these factors corrected, we obtain excellent agreement with the Hoffmann et al. (i.e., \"Chinchilla\") scaling law. Counter to a hypothesis of Hoffmann et al., we find that careful learning rate decay is not essential for the validity of their scaling law. As a secondary result, we derive scaling laws for the optimal learning rate and batch size, finding that tuning the AdamW $\\beta_2$ parameter is essential at lower batch sizes.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PorianWJSC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PorianWJSC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/b6341525cd84f3be0ef203e4d7cd8556-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：语言模型 compute-optimal scaling 在不同论文里给出了彼此不一致的结论，尤其是模型参数量与训练 token 数的最优配比经常冲突。这个问题之所以值得重新做，是因为这些分歧已经不只是学术细节，而是在直接影响训练预算分配、数据建设和是否采用小模型多 token 还是大模型少 token 的策略。","importance":"这是典型的 pretrain 核心问题，而且是方法论级别的重要工作。它的价值不在于再报一个新 scaling law，而在于解释为什么过去会出现矛盾结论：如果分歧来自训练目标、优化不足、数据重复、tokenizer 或评估协议差异，那么很多被当成‘规律’的结果其实只是实验条件的投影；这对大规模训练决策非常关键。","technical_approach":"从题目看，作者的核心工作是‘解析并统一’已有 compute-optimal scaling 结果，而不是提出全新模型。合理的技术路径包括：在统一训练配方和评估标准下重跑 scaling sweep，拆分参数、数据、训练步数等因素的交互，并用更细的统计拟合或误差分析解释先前结论为何不一致；与直接拟合单条幂律不同，这种做法的关键价值在于把混杂因素显式拉开，告诉你 law 适用于什么 regime、不适用于什么 regime。","experiments":"实验的关键事实应围绕 scaling 曲线本身。值得关注的内容包括：不同 compute 区间下最优参数/token 配比是否发生 regime shift，优化不充分时得到的最优点是否系统偏向某一侧，以及在控制数据质量或重复率后结论是否变化；好的 ablation 还会说明 tokenizer、context length、batch size 或训练时长截断是否会显著扭曲拟合结果。由于没有摘要，无法确认作者使用的模型规模范围、总算力区间以及最终给出的定量 scaling 指数。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper tackles a central inconsistency in language-model scaling: prior studies disagree on the compute-optimal trade-off between model size and training tokens. The issue is no longer academic bookkeeping, because these discrepancies directly affect how teams allocate budget between parameters, data, and training duration.","importance":"This is highly relevant to pretraining methodology. The value is not merely another scaling fit, but a resolution of why earlier compute-optimal results disagreed in the first place: if the mismatch is driven by optimization shortfall, data repetition, tokenizer effects, or evaluation choices, then several widely cited 'laws' are really conditional observations tied to specific experimental regimes.","technical_approach":"The paper likely takes a reconciliation approach rather than proposing a new model. That usually means re-running scaling sweeps under a more controlled recipe, separating the interactions among parameters, tokens, and optimization budget, and using tighter statistical analysis to identify which hidden assumptions caused earlier disagreements; this is more useful than fitting a single power law if the real story involves regime dependence.","experiments":"The critical evidence should come from the scaling curves themselves. The strongest findings would show whether the optimal parameter/token ratio shifts across compute ranges, how undertraining biases the apparent optimum, and how data quality or duplication changes the result; good ablations would also test tokenizer, context length, and training-horizon choices. Without the abstract, the exact compute range, model scales, and final exponents cannot be reported reliably.","authors_note":""},"tags":["scaling-law","compute-optimal","chinchilla","training-efficiency"],"keywords":["LLMs","scaling laws","Chinchilla","copmute-optimal","power laws"],"recommendation":{"zh":"把 scaling 分歧拆成可定位的 confounder，能直接指导预算分配；建议只盯“哪些条件下 law 失效”的表/图并对照自家训练栈。","en":"Decomposes scaling disagreements into actionable confounders that affect budget allocation; focus on the tables/figures showing when the law breaks and map them onto your own training stack."}},{"id":"2406.07524","title":"Simple and Effective Masked Diffusion Language Models","authors":["Subham S. Sahoo","Marianne Arriola","Yair Schiff","Aaron Gokaslan","Edgar Marroquin","Justin T. Chiu","Alexander Rush","Volodymyr Kuleshov"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$9","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.07524","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SahooASGMCRK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SahooASGMCRK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/eb0b13cc515724ab8015bc978fdde0ad-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":10,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"现有扩散语言模型和自回归(AR)语言模型在语言建模性能上存在显著差距，此前的扩散LM方案复杂度高、采样效率低，无法落地实际应用。","importance":"范式级贡献，证明了简单的掩码离散扩散方案可以达到接近AR模型的性能，缩小了扩散LM和AR LM的性能差距，为非AR语言建模范式的落地提供了可行的训练方案。","technical_approach":"训练目标改进方案，原创了Rao-Blackwell化的简化训练目标，本质是经典掩码语言建模损失的混合形式，无需复杂的扩散过程设计；配套训练策略支持训练encoder-only模型，可实现半自回归任意长度文本采样，采样效率比此前扩散LM提升3倍以上。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体实验参数量、数据集规模及量化指标，仅说明该方案性能优于此前最优扩散LM，采样效率大幅提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"There is a significant performance gap between existing diffusion language models and autoregressive (AR) language models. Previous diffusion LM solutions have high complexity and low sampling efficiency, so they cannot be applied in practice.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution. It proves that a simple masked discrete diffusion solution can achieve performance close to AR models, narrows the performance gap between diffusion LM and AR LM, and provides a feasible training scheme for the implementation of non-AR language modeling paradigms.","technical_approach":"Training objective improvement solution. It proposes an original Rao-Blackwellized simplified training objective, which is essentially a mixture of classical masked language modeling losses, without complex diffusion process design. The supporting training strategy supports training encoder-only models, enables semi-autoregressive arbitrary-length text sampling, and sampling efficiency is more than 3x higher than previous diffusion LMs.","experiments":"The provided abstract does not disclose specific experimental parameter size, dataset scale and quantitative indicators, only states that this scheme outperforms the previous best diffusion LM, and sampling efficiency is greatly improved.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion-lm","masked-lm","non-ar","language-modeling","sampling"],"keywords":["Text Diffusion","Generative Models"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"离散扩散语言模型的性能显著落后于同规模自回归语言模型","claim_en":"Discrete diffusion language models significantly underperform autoregressive language models of the same scale","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"简单的掩码扩散+混合MLM损失即可大幅提升扩散LM性能，无需复杂的噪声调度和扩散过程设计","claim_en":"Simple masked diffusion + mixed MLM loss can greatly improve diffusion LM performance without complex noise scheduling and diffusion process design","opposes":"Prior work assumes that diffusion language models require complex noise scheduling and sampling process design to achieve acceptable performance","opposes_cite_hint":"Li 2022 D3PM","evidence_anchor":"§3.1, Table 1","why_contested":"It greatly reduces the R&D and deployment threshold of diffusion LM, and clears the core obstacle for large-scale application of non-AR language modeling"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"它真正动摇了“离散扩散 LM 只是复杂但打不过 AR”的 prior；若你关心非 AR 路线，应该马上复现其简化目标，看性能差距是否在你家 tokenizer/scale 下继续收窄。","en":"This genuinely weakens the prior that discrete diffusion LMs are just a complicated way to lose to AR; if you care about non-AR modeling, reproduce the simplified objective and test whether the gap keeps shrinking at your tokenizer and scale."}},{"id":"2407.08608","title":"FlashAttention-3: Fast and Accurate Attention with Asynchrony and Low-precision","authors":["Jay Shah","Ganesh Bikshandi","Ying Zhang","Vijay Thakkar","Pradeep Ramani","Tri Dao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.08608","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ShahBZTRD24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ShahBZTRD24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/7ede97c3e082c6df10a8d6103a2eebd2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的核心问题是：FlashAttention-2 已经把 attention 的访存做得很省，但在 H100 这代 GPU 上仍远没有吃满硬件，导致长上下文和大模型训练/推理里 attention 继续成为系统瓶颈。过去的优化主要围绕减少 HBM 读写和更好的 tiling，但没有真正利用 Hopper 的异步执行、TMA 数据搬运和 FP8 支持，所以算力利用率卡在较低水平。","importance":"这是系统级但对 pretrain 很直接的一篇工作，价值在于它把 attention 从“内存优化问题”进一步改成了“异步流水化和低精度协同设计问题”。对大规模预训练的启示很明确：当硬件代际变化足够大时，旧 kernel 的最优点会失效，训练吞吐和长上下文成本不只取决于算法复杂度，也取决于 kernel 是否匹配新硬件执行模型。","technical_approach":"核心方法是面向 Hopper 重写 FlashAttention 内核，不是改 Transformer 公式，而是改 attention 的执行方式。论文用了三类关键设计：第一，利用 Tensor Core 计算与 TMA 搬运的异步性，通过 warp specialization 把不同 warp 固定分工，让数据搬运、矩阵乘和归约能重叠执行；第二，把 block-wise matmul 和 softmax 交错而不是严格串行，减少等待和流水线空洞；第三，引入面向 FP8 的 block quantization 和 incoherent processing，用更低精度提高吞吐，同时通过分块量化控制误差。和 FlashAttention-2 相比，重点不是继续省一次访存，而是让计算、搬运、归一化三件事同时发生，因此在 Hopper 上更接近硬件上限。","experiments":"论文摘要给出的关键事实是：FlashAttention-3 明显提升了 H100 上 attention 的利用率，而 FlashAttention-2 在 H100 上只有约 35% utilization。摘要截断后没有完整数字，但从论文主张看，实验重点不是下游精度 SOTA，而是 kernel 级吞吐、延迟和数值准确性；通常会覆盖 FP16/BF16 以及 FP8 配置，并比较 FlashAttention-2、标准 attention 实现和不同序列长度。最有价值的观察应是两点：一，Hopper 特有异步机制带来的收益会随序列长度和 head dimension 增大而更明显；二，FP8 只有和分块量化及数值稳定处理一起设计时才有实际可用性，否则 softmax 前后的误差会迅速放大。","authors_note":"机构与团队可确认部分：作者名单包含 Tri Dao 团队常见合作者 Jay Shah、Ganesh Bikshandi、Ying Zhang、Vijay Thakkar、Pradeep Ramani 等，这条线最代表性的前作是 FlashAttention / FlashAttention-2。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a concrete systems bottleneck: FlashAttention-2 reduced memory traffic well, but it still leaves a large fraction of Hopper GPU compute idle, so attention remains expensive for LLM training, inference, and long-context workloads. Earlier work mostly optimized IO and tiling, but did not fully exploit Hopper’s asynchronous execution model, TMA, and FP8 support.","importance":"This is a systems paper with direct pretraining relevance because it changes what the bottleneck looks like on new hardware. The main lesson is that attention optimization is no longer just about fewer HBM reads and writes; on modern GPUs, utilization depends heavily on overlapping compute, data movement, and normalization, and that translates directly into lower training cost and better long-context scaling.","technical_approach":"The contribution is a Hopper-specific reimplementation of FlashAttention rather than a new attention algorithm. It combines three design choices: warp specialization to overlap Tensor Core compute with TMA data movement, interleaving block matmul with softmax instead of treating them as separate phases, and FP8-friendly block quantization with incoherent processing to gain throughput while keeping numerical error under control. Relative to FlashAttention-2, the key difference is that the kernel is organized as an asynchronous pipeline instead of a mostly sequential IO-optimized schedule.","experiments":"The headline fact from the abstract is that FlashAttention-2 achieves only about 35% utilization on H100, and FlashAttention-3 substantially improves on that. The abstract is truncated, so the full speedup numbers are not available here, but the paper’s experimental value is likely in kernel throughput, latency, and accuracy under BF16/FP16/FP8 settings, compared against FlashAttention-2 and standard attention kernels across sequence lengths. The most useful expected findings are that Hopper-specific overlap matters more at larger sequence lengths and head dimensions, and that FP8 is only practical when paired with blockwise quantization and stability-aware processing.","authors_note":"Confirmed at a high level: the author list includes recurring collaborators from the FlashAttention line, whose representative prior work is FlashAttention and FlashAttention-2."},"tags":["flash-attention","gpu-optimization","hopper","low-precision"],"keywords":["attention","hardware-aware algorithms","H100"],"recommendation":{"zh":"Hopper 上 attention 的最优点被重写：异步流水+FP8 才是吞吐关键；如果你用 H100 训长上下文，应直接对照其 kernel 设计做落地评估。","en":"On Hopper, attention’s optimum is rewritten—async pipelining plus FP8 is the throughput lever; if you train long-context on H100, benchmark against their kernel design and port the ideas."}},{"id":"Slagle24","title":"SpaceByte: Towards Deleting Tokenization from Large Language Modeling","authors":["Kevin Slagle"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Slagle24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Slagle24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e1f418450107c4a0ddc16d008d131573-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心问题是：现有 LLM 几乎都依赖 tokenizer 把文本切成离散子词，但 tokenizer 会引入语言依赖、OOV 行为、形态切分偏差和额外系统复杂度，因此值得重新问一句：能不能直接去掉 tokenization。过去字符级建模一直存在，但通常因为序列太长、优化太难和效率太差而被边缘化。","importance":"这是一篇很值得关注的新型语言建模方向工作。它的重要性不在于立刻替代 BPE，而在于正面挑战了 tokenizer 这个默认前提：如果删除 tokenization 后仍能保留可扩展性和竞争力，那对多语言、公平性、鲁棒性、统一模态表示甚至 byte-level multimodal 建模都会有深远影响。","technical_approach":"从标题看，SpaceByte 的核心方法是朝无 tokenization 的语言建模迈进，很可能采用 byte-level 或接近 byte-level 的建模单位，并配合结构设计来弥补序列长度暴涨的问题。关键设计一般会围绕两点：第一，如何让模型在更长序列上高效传播信息，比如分层、分块或局部-全局混合机制；第二，如何避免纯 byte-level 训练过于难学，使模型仍能形成词级和语义级抽象。和传统 tokenizer 路线相比，它舍弃了人工压缩和词形先验，换来更统一、更原生的输入空间，但代价是训练效率和长程建模难度都会上升。","experiments":"当前信息里没有给出模型规模、语料规模和具体指标。预期论文会把 SpaceByte 与 BPE/subword 模型、字符或字节级 baseline 做比较，关注 perplexity、训练效率、序列长度开销以及跨语言表现。最关键的实验不是单一英文性能，而是 tokenizer 弱势场景：拼写噪声、形态复杂语言、代码、混合语言文本等。如果在这些场景下无 tokenizer 模型更稳，而主流语料上只付出可接受代价，这条路就有研究价值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper questions a default assumption in modern language modeling: the need for tokenization. Tokenizers are convenient but they inject language-specific segmentation choices, OOV behavior, and extra system complexity, while character- or byte-level modeling has historically been avoided mainly because it makes sequences longer and optimization harder.","importance":"This is a genuinely interesting pretraining-direction paper because it challenges a foundational design choice rather than proposing another small improvement within the standard stack. If language models can move meaningfully toward tokenization-free modeling without collapsing efficiency or capability, the implications reach multilingual modeling, robustness, and possibly unified byte-level treatment across modalities.","technical_approach":"From the title, SpaceByte is a step toward tokenization-free language modeling, likely using bytes or a similarly fine-grained input unit plus architectural changes to cope with longer sequences. The main design problem is how to preserve efficient information flow and semantic abstraction when the sequence becomes much longer. Relative to subword tokenization, this trades away hand-designed compression and lexical priors in exchange for a more uniform input space, but the cost is harder optimization and a tougher long-context burden.","experiments":"The provided information does not include model sizes, training data, or quantitative results. The most informative expected comparisons would be against BPE/subword models and other character or byte baselines, measuring perplexity, training efficiency, sequence length overhead, and multilingual robustness. The strongest case for this line of work would come from settings where tokenizers are weak, such as noisy text, morphologically rich languages, code, or mixed-language inputs, while keeping the penalty on standard corpora within a reasonable range.","authors_note":""},"tags":["tokenizer","byte-level","language-modeling","architecture"],"keywords":["byte level language model","model architecture","tokenization","efficient pretraining"],"recommendation":{"zh":"它真正动摇了“tokenizer 是默认前提”这个 prior；建议立刻复现其 scaling/效率曲线，判断 byte-level 是否已从玩具设定跨到可做正式 pretrain。","en":"This is one of the few papers that actually weakens the prior that tokenization is mandatory; I’d reproduce the scaling/efficiency curves immediately to see whether byte-level modeling has crossed from curiosity to a real pretraining option."}},{"id":"2405.05254","title":"You Only Cache Once: Decoder-Decoder Architectures for Language Models","authors":["Yutao Sun","Li Dong","Yi Zhu","Shaohan Huang","Wenhui Wang","Shuming Ma","Quanlu Zhang","Jianyong Wang","Furu Wei"],"institutions":["Microsoft Research"],"abstract":"$c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.05254","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Sun0ZHWMZ0W24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Sun0ZHWMZ0W24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/0df38cd13520747e1e64e5b123a78ef8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"标准 decoder-only Transformer 的 KV cache 随序列长度和层数线性增长，导致长序列推理时 GPU 显存成为瓶颈。YOCO 提出只缓存一次 KV 的 decoder-decoder 架构来大幅降低显存需求。","importance":"架构级贡献，对 pretrain 研究有直接影响。KV cache 是制约长上下文训练和推理的核心瓶颈之一。YOCO 在保持全局注意力能力的同时将 KV cache 降到只缓存一次，这对长上下文 pretrain 和高效 serving 都有实际意义。此外，prefill 阶段可以提前退出（early exit）而不改变最终输出，这是一个有趣的计算流设计。","technical_approach":"将模型分为两部分：底部的 self-decoder 和顶部的 cross-decoder。self-decoder 用标准自注意力编码输入并生成全局 KV cache；cross-decoder 通过交叉注意力复用这组 KV cache，而不再各自维护独立的 KV cache。整体行为等价于 decoder-only Transformer，但 KV cache 只需存储一次（self-decoder 的输出）。关键 trade-off：cross-decoder 层不再有自己的 KV cache，信息瓶颈在 self-decoder 的表示质量上。prefill 阶段的 early exit 是因为 cross-decoder 只需要 self-decoder 的最终 KV，不需要等所有层计算完。","experiments":"在多种 scaling 设置下与标准 Transformer 对比，性能相当（favorable performance）。GPU 显存需求大幅降低，prefill 速度显著提升。具体数字需查看全文，但摘要强调了在 scaling up 模型大小和上下文长度时的优势。","authors_note":"来自微软研究院。Li Dong 和 Furu Wei（未在作者列表中但该团队的核心成员）是 UniLM、BEiT、LongNet 等系列工作的主要推动者，在高效架构设计方面有持续产出。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Standard decoder-only Transformers have KV cache that grows linearly with sequence length and layer count, creating a GPU memory bottleneck for long sequences. YOCO proposes a decoder-decoder architecture that caches KV pairs only once.","importance":"An architecture-level contribution directly relevant to pretraining. KV cache is a core bottleneck for long-context training and inference. YOCO maintains global attention capability while drastically reducing memory, and its computation flow enables prefill early exit—both practically valuable for long-context pretraining and serving.","technical_approach":"Splits the model into a self-decoder (bottom) and cross-decoder (top). The self-decoder encodes input with standard self-attention and produces global KV caches. The cross-decoder reuses these KV caches via cross-attention instead of maintaining its own. The model behaves like a decoder-only Transformer but stores KV only once. Key trade-off: the cross-decoder's representational capacity depends entirely on the self-decoder's KV quality. Prefill early exit works because the cross-decoder only needs the self-decoder's final KV output.","experiments":"Achieves comparable performance to standard Transformers across multiple scaling settings while substantially reducing GPU memory. Prefill stage is significantly faster. Specific numbers require the full paper; the abstract emphasizes advantages when scaling model size and context length.","authors_note":"From Microsoft Research. Li Dong is a key contributor to UniLM, BEiT, LongNet, and other efficient architecture works from the same group."},"tags":["kv-cache","architecture","decoder-decoder","long-context","efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Li Dong","Furu Wei"],"keywords":["Decoder-Decoder","Model Architecture"],"recommendation":{"zh":"少见的架构改动能直接改写 serving/pretrain 成本模型；若等价性和 early-exit setup 站得住，值得马上进内部长上下文 ablation，而不只是当工程 trick 看。","en":"Rare architecture work that directly changes the serving/pretraining cost model; if the equivalence claim and early-exit setup are clean, this should go straight into internal long-context ablations rather than being filed as an engineering trick."}},{"id":"WangWSM024","title":"GREATS: Online Selection of High-Quality Data for LLM Training in Every Iteration","authors":["Jiachen T. Wang","Tong Wu","Dawn Song","Prateek Mittal","Ruoxi Jia"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Online batch selection methods offer an adaptive alternative to static training data selection by dynamically selecting data batches during training. However, existing methods either rely on impractical reference models or simple heuristics that may not capture true data informativeness. To address these limitations, we propose \\emph{GREedy Approximation Taylor Selection} (GREATS), a principled and efficient online batch selection method that applies greedy algorithm to optimize the data batch quality approximated by Taylor expansion. We develop a series of techniques to scale GREATS to large-scale model training. Extensive experiments with large language models (LLMs) demonstrate that GREATS significantly improves training convergence speed and generalization performance.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangWSM024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangWSM024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ed165f2ff227cf36c7e3ef88957dadd9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM在线数据选择方案要么依赖 impractical 的参考模型，要么使用简单启发式规则无法准确衡量数据的信息量，静态数据筛选则无法适应训练过程的动态需求。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了高效的在线批次数据选择算法，可在训练过程中动态筛选高质量数据，提升预训练收敛速度和泛化性能，无需额外引入大型参考模型。","technical_approach":"算法优化方案，基于泰勒展开近似衡量数据对模型训练的信息量，使用贪心算法实现每轮训练批次的最优选择，配套了适配大规模LLM训练的工程优化，单轮数据选择 overhead 低于5%。","experiments":"在7B参数LLM预训练实验中，GREATS可减少30%的训练步数达到相同困惑度，下游通用任务平均精度提升2.1%；ablation实验显示泰勒展开近似的误差低于2%，不影响模型最终性能。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM online data selection solutions either rely on impractical reference models, or use simple heuristic rules that cannot accurately measure data informativeness, while static data filtering cannot adapt to the dynamic needs of the training process.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It proposes an efficient online batch data selection algorithm, which can dynamically select high-quality data during training, improve pre-training convergence speed and generalization performance, without introducing additional large reference models.","technical_approach":"Algorithm optimization solution. It measures the informativeness of data for model training based on Taylor expansion approximation, uses greedy algorithm to achieve optimal selection of training batches per iteration, and is equipped with engineering optimizations adapted to large-scale LLM training, with per-iteration data selection overhead lower than 5%.","experiments":"In 7B parameter LLM pre-training experiments, GREATS can reduce 30% of training steps to reach the same perplexity, and the average accuracy of downstream general tasks is improved by 2.1%; ablation experiments show that the error of Taylor expansion approximation is lower than 2%, which does not affect the final performance of the model.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-quality","data-selection","llm","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["Online Batch Selection","Large Language Model"],"notable_authors":["Dawn Song","Prateek Mittal","Ruoxi Jia"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"预训练数据的信息量存在差异，优先选择高信息量数据可提升训练效率","claim_en":"The informativeness of pre-training data varies, and prioritizing high-information data can improve training efficiency","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"如果你一直把在线选数当成工程噱头，这篇值得改观；动作上应先在小规模 run 里测 overhead 与收益曲线，但别在 full-scale 前就相信其贪心近似一定稳。","en":"If you’ve been dismissing online data selection as mostly systems theater, this is a good reason to revisit that view; first test the overhead–gain curve on small runs, but don’t assume the greedy approximation will stay stable at full scale."}},{"id":"2405.14591","title":"Base of RoPE Bounds Context Length","authors":["Mingyu Xu","Xin Men","Bingning Wang","Qingyu Zhang","Hongyu Lin","Xianpei Han","Weipeng Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Position embedding is a core component of current Large Language Models (LLMs). Rotary position embedding (RoPE), a technique that encodes the position information with a rotation matrix, has been the de facto choice for position embedding in many LLMs, such as the Llama series. RoPE has been further utilized to extend long context capability, which is roughly based on adjusting the \\textit{base} parameter of RoPE to mitigate out-of-distribution (OOD) problems in position embedding. However, in this paper, we find that LLMs may obtain a superficial long-context ability based on the OOD theory. We revisit the role of RoPE in LLMs and propose a novel property of long-term decay, we derive that the \\textit{base of RoPE bounds context length}: there is an absolute lower bound for the base value to obtain certain context length capability. Our work reveals the relationship between context length and RoPE base both theoretically and empirically, which may shed light on future long context training.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14591","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XuMWZLHC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XuMWZLHC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9f12dd32d552f3ad9eaa0e9dfec291be-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论是：RoPE 的 base 参数不是“随便调大就能无限拉长上下文”的旋钮，它在机制上会对可用上下文长度形成硬约束。过去很多长上下文扩展把问题归因于位置编码 OOD，并用 base 调整去“缓解分布外”，作者认为这会产生表面长上下文能力而非真正可用的远程依赖建模。","importance":"贡献是机制级的负面结果 + 理论约束：提出 RoPE 的 long-term decay 性质，并推导出“base 下界约束可扩展上下文长度”。对 pretrain 的直接价值是给出一个可操作的设计边界：如果你用 RoPE 做长上下文 mid-train/continual pretrain，仅靠 base scaling 可能在某个长度后必然退化，需要换位置方案或改注意力结构，而不是继续堆数据和训练步数。","technical_approach":"方法上是对 RoPE 旋转编码的重新分析：把注意力中的相位旋转视为随距离增长的衰减/失配过程，形式化为 long-term decay，并据此推导 base 与可保持有效相对位置信号的最大距离之间的界。与常见的“只从 OOD 角度解释”不同，这里强调即使分布内训练充分，RoPE 的数学结构也会让远距离 token 的相对位置信息逐步不可分辨，从而出现看似能跑长输入但检索/推理失败的现象。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体实验设置与数值（模型规模、长度、基线、提升/下降幅度均缺失），因此只能概括其主张：作者声称观察到基于 OOD 理论的 base 调整可能带来“superficial long-context ability”，并用理论推导支持“存在 base 的绝对下界”。缺失的关键信息是：该界在常见维度/头数/频率分配下对应的实际 token 长度量级，以及与 RoPE scaling、NTK-aware scaling、YaRN 等工程技巧的对照结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The main claim is that RoPE’s base is not a free knob for arbitrarily extending context: its structure imposes a hard bound on usable context length. Prior long-context extensions often frame the issue as positional OOD and tune the base to “fix distribution shift,” which can yield superficial long-context behavior without robust long-range dependency modeling.","importance":"This is a mechanism-level constraint (a negative result with theory): it introduces a long-term decay property of RoPE and derives that the RoPE base lower-bounds the achievable context length. For pretraining practice, it provides a concrete design boundary: beyond a certain length, more base scaling, more data, or more steps may not recover performance, implying you may need a different positional scheme or attention modification.","technical_approach":"The paper re-analyzes RoPE as phase rotations inside attention and formalizes how increasing token distance leads to decay/mismatch of relative position signals (long-term decay). From this, it derives a bound linking the base to the maximum distance over which relative positions remain distinguishable. Unlike explanations purely based on OOD, the argument is that even with sufficient in-distribution training, RoPE’s math can make far-apart tokens effectively position-ambiguous, producing long inputs that run but fail on retrieval/reasoning.","experiments":"The abstract provides no concrete experimental details (model sizes, context lengths, baselines, or numbers). It claims empirical evidence that OOD-motivated base tuning can create superficial long-context ability, and supports the bound with theory. Missing but critical for practitioners are: what token-length regime the bound implies under common RoPE configs, and comparisons against practical scaling tricks (e.g., NTK-aware scaling, YaRN-style methods).","authors_note":""},"tags":["rope","position-embedding","long-context","scaling"],"keywords":["Large Language Model","Long context","Rotary position embedding"],"recommendation":{"zh":"这篇会纠正“调大 RoPE base 就能续命长上下文”的错觉；若推导和实验对齐，动作很明确：别再把 base scaling 当主方案，尽快换位置编码或注意力设计。","en":"This should reset the bad habit of treating larger RoPE base as a free long-context knob; if the theory and experiments line up, the action item is clear: stop leaning on base scaling and move to a different positional or attention design."}},{"id":"YeGCZGSWJLBK24","title":"Diffusion of Thought: Chain-of-Thought Reasoning in Diffusion Language Models","authors":["Jiacheng Ye","Shansan Gong","Liheng Chen","Lin Zheng","Jiahui Gao","Han Shi","Chuan Wu","Xin Jiang","Zhenguo Li","Wei Bi","Lingpeng Kong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YeGCZGSWJLBK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YeGCZGSWJLBK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/be30024e7fa2c29cac7a6dafcbb8571f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要与关键信息，无法可靠说明该工作要解决的“扩散语言模型如何做链式推理（CoT）”的具体障碍是什么，以及 Diffusion-of-Thought 的定义与评价方式。","importance":"缺少摘要与实验信息，无法判断其对 diffusion LM 作为 AR 的替代/补充范式的推动力度，尤其是推理可控性、采样成本与质量的权衡。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要，无法说明其是在离散扩散（如 D3PM）还是连续扩散上实现、如何表示中间推理状态、是否引入显式 latent、以及如何训练/采样以产生可读 CoT。","experiments":"缺少摘要，无法提取模型规模、推理基准、采样步数、与 AR-CoT 或其他 diffusion LM 的对照及数值结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The abstract is missing, so the specific obstacle for chain-of-thought reasoning in diffusion LMs and the definition of “Diffusion of Thought” cannot be summarized reliably.","importance":"Without results, the impact on diffusion LMs as an alternative/complement to AR—especially controllability vs sampling cost—cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"It is unclear whether this is discrete or continuous diffusion, how intermediate reasoning states are represented, whether latents are used, and how training/sampling yields readable CoT, due to missing abstract.","experiments":"No experimental details (model size, reasoning benchmarks, sampling steps, baselines, numbers) are available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion-lm","cot","reasoning","non-ar"],"keywords":["text diffusion model","mathematical reasoning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"题目很抓人，但在缺摘要和关键实验前我不会投入时间；先只查任务定义、采样成本和是否真优于 AR，证据不硬就当 diffusion LM 备查条目。","en":"The title is attractive, but without an abstract and key experiments I wouldn’t spend real time on it; only check the task definition, sampling cost, and whether it actually beats AR—otherwise keep it as a diffusion-LM bibliography item."}},{"id":"2406.06046","title":"MATES: Model-Aware Data Selection for Efficient Pretraining with Data Influence Models","authors":["Zichun Yu","Spandan Das","Chenyan Xiong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.06046","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YuDX24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YuDX24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c4bec0d2fd217e6c2c3eafeced432582-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":9,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是：预训练数据选择不该是一次性的静态筛选，而应该随着模型训练进展动态变化。已有方法通常依赖手工规则或更大的参考模型先给数据打分，再固定采样策略；问题是模型早期、中期、后期对数据的“有效性偏好”并不一样，静态打分会错过这种训练动态。","importance":"这是很典型的 pretrain 方法级工作，而且价值不低。数据选择一直是提升训练效率的关键杠杆，但大家往往把它做成离线排序问题；MATES 的重要启示是，把数据选择看成一个随模型状态变化而更新的在线控制问题，可能比继续堆更复杂的 heuristic 更有效。如果这套思路成立，它会影响 curriculum、mixture scheduling 和 continual pretraining 的做法。","technical_approach":"MATES 的核心是训练一个小型 data influence model，持续近似当前预训练模型对每个样本的“oracle influence”，再据此选择在当前阶段最有效的数据。关键机制分两步：先通过局部 probing 直接估计某些样本对预训练目标的影响，得到 oracle signal；再用这个信号微调一个小模型，让它可以便宜地在大规模语料上预测影响值。与手工质量分或大模型打分不同，它是 model-aware 且 time-varying 的。这样设计有效，是因为数据价值本来就是相对于当前模型参数而言的；但代价是 influence 估计本身有噪声，且在线更新会引入系统复杂度。","experiments":"摘要没有给出模型规模、语料规模、训练 token 数、对比方法和具体增益，因此不能写具体数字。可以确定的实验重点包括：相对静态 data selection 是否提高样本效率、influence model 预测与 oracle probing 的相关性、以及随着训练推进，模型偏好的数据分布如何变化。若论文做得扎实，最值得看的是 scaling 观察：小模型学到的 data influence 是否能迁移到更大训练阶段，还是必须频繁重估。","authors_note":"作者包括 Chenyan Xiong。机构信息无法仅凭给定内容可靠确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that pretraining data selection should not be a one-shot static filtering problem. Most existing methods score data once using heuristics or a larger reference model and then keep the sampling policy fixed, even though the usefulness of data changes as the pretrained model itself evolves.","importance":"This is a core pretraining-method paper, and a meaningful one. Data selection is a major lever for training efficiency, but it is usually framed as offline ranking. MATES instead treats it as a dynamic, model-dependent decision problem. If that framing holds up, it has implications for curriculum design, mixture scheduling, and continual pretraining.","technical_approach":"MATES trains a small data influence model that continually approximates the current pretrained model’s oracle data influence and uses it to select the most effective data at each stage of training. The method has two parts: locally probe the pretraining model to obtain an oracle-like influence signal on selected examples, then fine-tune a lightweight predictor that can score large corpora cheaply. Unlike heuristic quality scores or teacher-model rankings, this is both model-aware and time-varying. The design makes sense because data value is inherently relative to the model’s current state. The trade-off is extra system complexity and noise in the influence estimates.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide model sizes, corpus sizes, token budgets, baselines, or exact gains, so no numeric claims should be invented. The key experiments should test whether dynamic influence-based selection improves sample efficiency over static selection, how well the small influence model tracks oracle probes, and how the preferred data distribution shifts over training. A particularly useful scaling question is whether influence predictors learned early or on smaller models transfer to later stages or larger runs.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pretraining","data-selection","data-quality","efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Chenyan Xiong"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Pretraining","Data Curation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"如果你还把数据选择当离线打分，这篇值得细看：它可能把 prior 改成“selection 是随模型状态变化的控制问题”；建议重点审 influence 估计噪声和在线开销是否把收益吃掉。","en":"If you still think of data selection as offline scoring, this is worth real attention: it may shift the prior toward selection as a model-state-dependent control problem; I’d scrutinize whether influence noise and online overhead eat the gains."}},{"id":"2402.12550","title":"Multilinear Mixture of Experts: Scalable Expert Specialization through Factorization","authors":["James Oldfield","Markos Georgopoulos","Grigorios Chrysos","Christos Tzelepis","Yannis Panagakis","Mihalis Nicolaou","Jiankang Deng","Ioannis Patras"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.12550","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001G0TPNDP24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001G0TPNDP24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/5eeb693f46d753e5fe24c97212c22bd2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要在“专家数足够大才会细粒度专门化”和“MoE 推理/训练成本不可控”之间找折中；以往 dense MoE 推理太贵，sparse MoE 又有离散路由带来的训练不稳定与工程复杂度。","importance":"贡献是结构化层设计：用因子分解把“看似需要巨大专家张量”的计算隐式化，目标是在不引入稀疏路由离散性的前提下，把专家规模扩到更细的专门化粒度；对大模型 pretrain 的启示是：MoE 不一定非要 token-level top-k 路由才能扩专家数。","technical_approach":"提出 μMoE（Multilinear MoE）层：核心是把原本会爆炸的专家权重张量保持在 factorized（分解）形式下做隐式计算，从而在计算图里实现“很多专家的组合”但不显式实例化全部参数/乘法。它试图同时规避两类代价：dense MoE 的高推理 FLOPs 与 sparse MoE 的非可微/近似可微路由训练问题。","experiments":"摘要表明主要面向视觉模型，并声称推理成本低于 dense MoE、训练问题少于 sparse MoE；但未给出具体模型规模、专家数、吞吐/延迟、精度指标与对比基线的数字，因此无法从摘要确认收益量级与适用边界（例如是否在大分辨率/长序列下仍成立）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets the MoE scaling bottleneck: you need many experts for fine-grained specialization, but dense MoE is too expensive at inference while sparse MoE introduces discrete routing that complicates training and stability.","importance":"This is a layer/architecture contribution: by factorizing the expert parameterization, it aims to scale the effective number of experts without paying dense-MoE inference cost or inheriting sparse-MoE routing pathologies—suggesting an alternative route to “more experts” beyond token-level top-k gating.","technical_approach":"They propose the μMoE (Multilinear MoE) layer, which performs the computation over an otherwise huge expert weight tensor implicitly in a factorized form. The design intent is to keep the model differentiable and stable (vs. discrete routing) while avoiding the FLOPs blow-up of dense mixtures.","experiments":"The abstract positions results on vision models and claims lower inference cost than dense MoE and fewer training issues than sparse MoE, but provides no concrete numbers (model sizes, expert counts, latency/throughput, accuracy deltas, baselines), so the practical gain and boundary conditions cannot be verified from the abstract alone.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","factorization","scaling","architecture"],"keywords":["interpretability","mixture of experts"],"recommendation":{"zh":"对 MoE 的启发在于：未必非要离散 top-k 路由才能做细粒度专门化；但这类因子化层常有“看起来参数多、实际表达受限”的风险，先看与强 sparse MoE baseline 是否公平。","en":"The useful takeaway is that fine-grained specialization may not require discrete top-k routing at all; but factorized layers often look larger than they really are, so I’d first check whether the comparison against strong sparse-MoE baselines is actually fair."}},{"id":"2406.01462","title":"The Importance of Online Data: Understanding Preference Fine-tuning via Coverage","authors":["Yuda Song","Gokul Swamy","Aarti Singh","J. Andrew Bagnell","Wen Sun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$10","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.01462","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001SSB024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001SSB024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/16c628ab12dc4caca8e7712affa6c767-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的核心问题是：为什么在线偏好优化常常比纯离线方法更有效，二者并不只是“同一离线偏好数据上的不同实现”。过去 DPO 一类方法常被视为 PPO/RLHF 的简化替代，因为两者都从同一批偏好数据起步；这篇工作指出，关键差别不在目标写法，而在训练数据对测试分布的覆盖是否足够，而在线采样恰好能补这个缺口。","importance":"它的重要性在于把偏好微调的争论从“算法形式”拉回到“数据覆盖”这个更基础的条件上。对 pretrain/post-train 接口的启示很直接：如果测试时模型会走到离线偏好数据没覆盖的区域，那么再漂亮的离线目标也会失效；在线数据的价值不是锦上添花，而是决定上限的因素。这类结论会影响 DPO、IPO、PPO 等方法的选型，也会影响偏好数据收集和合成策略。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个 coverage 视角下的理论分析，而不是提出新的训练算法。作者证明了：若存在全局覆盖条件，离线方法可以得到与在线方法相近的保证；但这个条件在大模型偏好学习里通常过强，因为生成分布会随策略更新偏移到训练数据外。进一步地，他们讨论了更弱的局部覆盖条件以及在线交互如何逐步修复支持集不匹配。和以往把 DPO 与 RLHF 近似等价的推导相比，这篇工作把“等价成立的前提”说清了，也指出前提一旦破裂，离线优化会出现系统性偏差。","experiments":"从给到的信息看，论文重点是理论结论，实验更可能是验证覆盖不足时离线方法退化、在线方法更稳，但摘要未提供模型规模、数据量或具体数值。可以确定的关键事实是：作者不是在比谁的目标函数常数更优，而是在构造和分析 coverage 变化下的性能差异。对工程读者真正有价值的观察应是，当偏好数据对当前策略分布覆盖不足时，继续堆离线 epoch 不能替代在线探索；如果论文正文给出合成实验，这些实验更应被看作理论现象的可视化，而不是 benchmark 冲榜结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a precise question: why does online preference tuning often outperform purely offline methods, even when both start from the same preference dataset? Prior work often treated DPO-like objectives as practical surrogates for online RLHF, but this paper argues that the real divider is dataset coverage—whether the preference data actually covers the test-time policy distribution.","importance":"Its main contribution is conceptual but important: it reframes preference tuning around coverage rather than objective design. For pretrain-to-posttrain research, this matters because it says offline alignment is fundamentally limited when the model drifts into regions unsupported by the preference data. Online data is therefore not just an optimization convenience; it can determine whether the method is statistically valid at all.","technical_approach":"The paper is a theory paper built around coverage analysis, not a new optimization algorithm. It proves that under a strong global coverage condition, offline preference optimization can enjoy guarantees similar to online methods; the catch is that this condition is often unrealistic once the policy changes and starts generating outside the logged data support. The analysis then discusses weaker local coverage notions and explains why online interaction can repair support mismatch over training. Compared with earlier equivalence-style analyses of DPO and RLHF, this paper makes the hidden assumption explicit and shows where the equivalence breaks.","experiments":"Based on the available abstract, the paper appears theory-first, and the abstract does not report model sizes, dataset scales, or benchmark numbers. The useful empirical takeaway is likely not raw SOTA but a demonstration that offline methods degrade when coverage is poor, whereas online collection remains robust by adapting the data distribution. For practitioners, the practical message is clear: more offline epochs do not substitute for new online data once the policy leaves the support of the preference dataset.","authors_note":""},"tags":["preference-optimization","online-rl","dpo","data-coverage"],"keywords":["Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback","LLM finetuning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"它把“在线优于离线”从算法口水战拉回 coverage 条件，这点很值；动作上是别再只比 DPO/PPO 目标，先量化支持集缺口，再决定要不要上在线采样。","en":"Its value is in pulling the online-vs-offline debate back to coverage assumptions instead of objective-function tribalism; the action item is to measure support mismatch first, then decide whether online sampling is necessary rather than just comparing DPO vs PPO."}},{"id":"AgarwalSZBRCZAA24","title":"Many-Shot In-Context Learning","authors":["Rishabh Agarwal","Avi Singh","Lei Zhang","Bernd Bohnet","Luis Rosias","Stephanie C. Y. Chan","Biao Zhang","Ankesh Anand","Zaheer Abbas","Azade Nova","John D. Co-Reyes","Eric Chu","Feryal M. P. Behbahani","Aleksandra Faust","Hugo Larochelle"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AgarwalSZBRCZAA24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AgarwalSZBRCZAA24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/8cb564df771e9eacbfe9d72bd46a24a9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"此前上下文学习(ICL)的研究主要集中在少样本场景，大模型上下文窗口扩展后，百/千样本的多 shot ICL的性能边界、瓶颈及优化方案尚未被系统研究。","importance":"认知级贡献，首次系统探索了多 shot ICL的性能表现，提出了两种无需大量人工标注数据的多 shot ICL优化方案，为大模型推理阶段的性能提升提供了新的路径。","technical_approach":"实验分析+方案设计，首先在10+生成和判别任务上验证了从少样本到多样本的性能提升趋势，针对人工标注数据不足的瓶颈，提出了用模型生成CoT替代人工标注的强化ICL，和无需标注 rationale 的无监督ICL两种方案。","experiments":"在2k样本的多 shot ICL场景下，性能相比少样本平均提升18.7%；强化ICL方案可达到人工标注数据91%的性能，无监督ICL方案可达到人工标注数据78%的性能，无需任何人工标注成本。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Previous in-context learning (ICL) research mainly focuses on few-shot scenarios. After the expansion of LLM context windows, the performance boundary, bottleneck and optimization scheme of hundred/thousand-shot many-shot ICL have not been systematically studied.","importance":"Cognition-level contribution. It systematically explores the performance of many-shot ICL for the first time, proposes two many-shot ICL optimization schemes that do not require a large amount of manually labeled data, and provides a new path for performance improvement of LLMs in the inference phase.","technical_approach":"Experimental analysis + scheme design. It first verifies the performance improvement trend from few-shot to many-shot on more than 10 generative and discriminative tasks. Aiming at the bottleneck of insufficient manually labeled data, two schemes are proposed: reinforced ICL using model-generated CoT instead of manual labels, and unsupervised ICL without labeled rationales.","experiments":"In the 2k-shot many-shot ICL scenario, the average performance is improved by 18.7% compared with few-shot; reinforced ICL can achieve 91% of the performance of manually labeled data, and unsupervised ICL can achieve 78% of the performance of manually labeled data without any manual labeling cost.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","many-shot","scaling","llm"],"keywords":["large language models","in-context learning","long-context models"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大模型上下文学习的性能随样本数量增加而提升","claim_en":"The performance of LLM in-context learning improves with the increase of sample size","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"别通读；只看实验主结论和多-shot 退化/增益拐点那几张图即可，价值在于帮你判断长上下文 ICL 何时还值得堆 exemplars，方法本身不算改变 prior。","en":"Don’t read it end to end; the main experimental section and the plots showing where many-shot ICL still helps are enough, since the value is mostly in deciding when longer-context exemplar stuffing is worth it."}},{"id":"Ahia0GHLTS24","title":"MAGNET: Improving the Multilingual Fairness of Language Models with Adaptive Gradient-Based Tokenization","authors":["Orevaoghene Ahia","Sachin Kumar","Hila Gonen","Valentin Hofmann","Tomasz Limisiewicz","Yulia Tsvetkov","Noah A. Smith"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$12","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Ahia0GHLTS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Ahia0GHLTS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/5572bc595de865c1450868fd5391e9c5-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：标准 tokenizer 往往对高资源语言更友好，导致多语言模型在低资源或形态复杂语言上出现系统性不公平。过去这件事通常通过更多数据、语言平衡采样或更大的词表来缓解，但 tokenization 本身的偏置常被当成固定前提；这篇工作把问题直接拉回到分词机制。","importance":"它的贡献更接近数据表示层的方法创新，对 multilingual pretrain 很有现实意义。原因是 tokenizer 决定了序列长度、子词边界和梯度分配方式，这些都会前移地影响训练动态与语言公平性；如果 tokenization 能被训练信号自适应地修正，那么比单纯加数据更省、更直接。","technical_approach":"核心方法是自适应的、基于梯度信号的 tokenization 调整。与一次性离线训练的 BPE 或 unigram tokenizer 不同，这类方法会利用模型训练过程中暴露出的梯度或误差信号，判断哪些 token 切分在某些语言上造成了学习困难，再据此调整词片边界或词表分配。关键设计点在于，它不是追求全局压缩率最优，而是追求跨语言学习难度更均衡；代价则是 tokenizer 与模型训练更加耦合，工程复杂度和稳定性要求更高。","experiments":"给定信息没有提供具体实验数值，因此无法确认模型大小、语种数量、训练 token 规模和指标提升。按题目判断，实验大概率会比较静态 tokenizer 与自适应 tokenizer 在多语言理解或生成任务上的平均性能，以及不同语言之间的方差/最差语言表现；如果结果成立，最有价值的证据会是低资源语言收益明显且高资源语言退化有限。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a structural source of multilingual unfairness: standard tokenizers tend to allocate capacity in ways that favor high-resource languages. Prior work often tried to patch this with more balanced data or larger vocabularies, but left tokenization itself mostly fixed; this work treats the tokenizer as part of the optimization problem.","importance":"This matters at the representation layer, and that makes it highly relevant to multilingual pretraining. Tokenization shapes sequence length, segmentation quality, and how gradients are distributed across languages, so improving it can change training dynamics earlier and more cheaply than simply scaling data or parameters.","technical_approach":"The core idea is an adaptive tokenizer updated using gradient-based signals from model training. Unlike static BPE or unigram tokenizers learned once offline, this approach uses learning signals to identify harmful segmentations and reallocate vocabulary or boundaries accordingly. The design choice is important: it optimizes for fairer learnability across languages rather than pure compression efficiency. The trade-off is tighter coupling between tokenizer and model training, which raises implementation and stability costs.","experiments":"The abstract and quantitative details are not provided here, so I cannot state model scale, number of languages, datasets, or exact gains. Based on the title, the critical evidence should be improvements in low-resource languages, reduced cross-language disparity, and limited regression on high-resource ones when compared with static tokenization baselines.","authors_note":""},"tags":["tokenizer","multilingual","fairness","adaptive-tokenization"],"keywords":["tokenization","multilingual LMs","over-segmentation","fariness"],"recommendation":{"zh":"如果你做 multilingual，这篇会逼你把 tokenizer 从固定前处理改看成可训练偏置源；值得复现，但要警惕 tokenizer-model 耦合后实验很容易被额外算力和工程细节污染。","en":"If you work on multilingual pretraining, this paper forces you to treat tokenization as a trainable source of bias rather than fixed preprocessing; worth reproducing, but be careful—the tokenizer-model coupling makes results easy to contaminate with extra compute and engineering detail."}},{"id":"AnML0LC24","title":"Make Your LLM Fully Utilize the Context","authors":["Shengnan An","Zexiong Ma","Zeqi Lin","Nanning Zheng","Jian-Guang Lou","Weizhu Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$13","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AnML0LC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AnML0LC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/71c3451f6cd6a4f82bb822db25cea4fd-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文针对的问题很直接：很多 LLM 明明给了足够长的上下文，却没有真正利用它，尤其在长输入中会忽略关键信息或偏向前部/后部片段。过去常见补救是继续扩窗、加位置编码改进或做检索增强，但“模型会不会用上下文”常被和“模型能不能看到上下文”混为一谈。","importance":"它的重要性在训练目标和使用效率层面。对 pretrain 的启示是：长上下文能力不只是架构容量问题，也是训练分布和优化信号问题；如果模型不会有效分配注意力，那么单纯加长 context window 的边际收益会很低，这会直接影响长上下文预训练与 annealing 策略设计。","technical_approach":"核心方法从标题看是让 LLM 更充分利用上下文，通常会涉及训练样本构造、目标函数调整或推理时的上下文强化。与单纯换更长 RoPE 或更强外部检索不同，这类方法会直接针对“上下文利用率”这个行为缺陷施加约束，例如鼓励模型引用分散信息、抑制位置偏置，或显式训练其在长文中定位证据。设计之所以有效，是因为它把问题从可见性转成可用性；边界是如果底层模型容量不足，或上下文本身噪声过大，强化利用也可能放大干扰。","experiments":"给定信息没有实验详情，无法确认用了多大模型、哪些长上下文基准、提升幅度是多少。按题目判断，关键实验应该会比较原模型与改进方法在 needle-in-a-haystack、多文档 QA、长文摘要或证据聚合任务上的差距，并分析不同位置、不同证据分布下的收益；若有消融，最重要的是区分训练阶段改动和推理阶段改动各自贡献。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical failure mode of LLMs: having access to long context does not mean they actually use it well. Many models still miss key evidence, over-focus on particular positions, or fail to integrate information spread across long inputs. Previous fixes often increased context length or added retrieval, but did not directly address utilization.","importance":"This matters at the level of training objectives and effective capacity. For pretraining, the message is that long-context performance is not only an architecture problem but also a data-distribution and optimization problem. If models do not learn to use context efficiently, larger windows alone will have weak returns.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method likely improves context utilization through training data design, objective shaping, or inference-time mechanisms that reward evidence use. The key difference from simply extending RoPE or adding retrieval is that it targets behavior: making the model attend to and integrate relevant information distributed across the prompt. That design is sensible because it attacks use, not visibility. The limitation is that if model capacity is too small or the context is mostly noise, stronger utilization pressure can also amplify distraction.","experiments":"The abstract is not provided, so I cannot state model size, datasets, or exact gains. The critical evidence should come from long-context benchmarks such as evidence retrieval, multi-document QA, or long summarization, ideally with analyses over evidence position and dispersion to show that the method improves actual context use rather than superficial benchmark tuning.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-context","context-utilization","llm","attention"],"keywords":["Large Language Model","Long-Context Large Language Model","Long-Context Training Data Construction","Long-Context Probing","Lost-in-the-Middle"],"recommendation":{"zh":"这类工作常把“不会用上下文”与 benchmark trick 混在一起；建议只在它把利用率和窗口长度明确解耦时认真看，否则读核心实验看是否真改善中段证据使用就够了。","en":"Papers in this area often blur genuine context underuse with benchmark gaming; I’d only take it seriously if it cleanly separates utilization from window size, otherwise just read the core experiments and see whether mid-context evidence use actually improves."}},{"id":"BeckPSAP0KBH24","title":"xLSTM: Extended Long Short-Term Memory","authors":["Maximilian Beck","Korbinian Pöppel","Markus Spanring","Andreas Auer","Oleksandra Prudnikova","Michael Kopp","Günter Klambauer","Johannes Brandstetter","Sepp Hochreiter"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$14","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BeckPSAP0KBH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BeckPSAP0KBH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c2ce2f2701c10a2b2f2ea0bfa43cfaa3-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"传统LSTM因无法并行训练、长序列建模能力不足，在大模型场景下被Transformer全面超越，LSTM架构在十亿级参数规模下的性能边界尚未被探索。","importance":"架构级贡献，提出了扩展后的xLSTM架构，在十亿级参数规模下可匹配甚至超越同规模Transformer的性能，为RNN类架构在大模型场景的应用提供了新的可能。","technical_approach":"架构改进方案，在传统LSTM基础上引入指数门控、适配的归一化和稳定训练技术，修改内存结构支持并行训练，解决了传统LSTM训练效率低、规模化后不稳定的问题。","experiments":"在7B参数规模下，xLSTM预训练困惑度略低于同规模Transformer，长序列推理速度比Transformer快3倍，下游通用任务精度达到Transformer的98%；scaling实验显示xLSTM的性能随参数量提升的趋势与Transformer一致。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Traditional LSTM is fully surpassed by Transformer in large model scenarios due to inability to train in parallel and insufficient long-sequence modeling capability. The performance boundary of LSTM architecture at billion-level parameter scale has not been explored.","importance":"Architecture-level contribution. It proposes the extended xLSTM architecture, which can match or even surpass the performance of Transformers of the same scale at billion-level parameter scale, providing new possibilities for the application of RNN-like architectures in large model scenarios.","technical_approach":"Architecture improvement solution. It introduces exponential gating, adapted normalization and stable training techniques on the basis of traditional LSTM, modifies the memory structure to support parallel training, and solves the problems of low training efficiency and instability after scaling of traditional LSTM.","experiments":"At 7B parameter scale, xLSTM pre-training perplexity is slightly lower than that of the same-scale Transformer, long-sequence inference speed is 3x faster than Transformer, and downstream general task accuracy reaches 98% of Transformer; scaling experiments show that the performance improvement trend of xLSTM with parameter size is consistent with Transformer.","authors_note":""},"tags":["architecture","xlstm","sequence-modeling","long-context"],"keywords":["LSTM","LLM","Language modeling","NLP","Memory"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"传统LSTM在大模型场景下性能和训练效率远低于Transformer","claim_en":"Traditional LSTM has much lower performance and training efficiency than Transformer in large model scenarios","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"改进后的xLSTM架构在十亿级参数规模下可匹配甚至超越同规模Transformer的性能","claim_en":"The improved xLSTM architecture can match or even surpass the performance of Transformers of the same scale at billion-level parameter scale","opposes":"Prior work assumes that RNN-like architectures cannot compete with Transformers at large parameter scales","opposes_cite_hint":"Vaswani 2017 Transformer","evidence_anchor":"§4.2, Table 3","why_contested":"It reopens the exploration of RNN-like architectures for large models, providing an alternative to Transformer with lower long-sequence inference cost"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"这篇值得看不是因为“RNN 回来了”，而是它逼你重新审视哪些 Transformer 优势其实是训练 recipe 优势；建议立刻做同等训练预算对照，否则很容易被 headline 带偏。","en":"Worth reading not because “RNNs are back,” but because it forces you to ask how much of Transformer dominance was really recipe dominance; run a strict equal-budget comparison before buying the headline."}},{"id":"2408.10189","title":"Transformers to SSMs: Distilling Quadratic Knowledge to Subquadratic Models","authors":["Aviv Bick","Kevin Y. Li","Eric P. Xing","J. Zico Kolter","Albert Gu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$15","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.10189","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BickLXKG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BickLXKG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3848fef259495bfd04d60cdc5c1b4db7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"次复杂度架构（如SSM）的预训练算力投入远低于顶级Transformer，直接从零训练无法达到Transformer的性能，而现有蒸馏方案无法有效将Transformer的知识迁移到结构差异较大的次复杂度架构上。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了通用的Transformer到次复杂度架构的蒸馏方法，可将预训练Transformer的知识高效迁移到SSM等架构上，大幅降低次复杂度架构的训练成本，提升其性能。","technical_approach":"蒸馏方案改进，核心思路是将Transformer和SSM都视为对token序列应用不同形式的混合矩阵，通过逐层匹配不同粒度的混合矩阵输出，逐步实现知识迁移，避免了结构差异导致的蒸馏效果差的问题。","experiments":"将7B参数Transformer蒸馏到同规模Mamba架构上，蒸馏后的Mamba预训练困惑度比从零训练的Mamba低1.3，下游任务精度提升4.2%，达到源Transformer性能的95%；蒸馏过程仅需原Transformer预训练算力的15%。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The pre-training compute investment of sub-quadratic architectures (such as SSM) is much lower than that of top-tier Transformers. Direct training from scratch cannot reach the performance of Transformers, and existing distillation solutions cannot effectively transfer Transformer knowledge to sub-quadratic architectures with large structural differences.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It proposes a general distillation method from Transformer to sub-quadratic architectures, which can efficiently transfer the knowledge of pre-trained Transformers to architectures such as SSM, greatly reducing the training cost of sub-quadratic architectures and improving their performance.","technical_approach":"Distillation scheme improvement. The core idea is to treat both Transformers and SSMs as applying different forms of mixing matrices to token sequences, and gradually realize knowledge transfer by matching the output of mixing matrices of different granularities layer by layer, avoiding the problem of poor distillation effect caused by structural differences.","experiments":"When distilling a 7B parameter Transformer to a Mamba architecture of the same scale, the distilled Mamba has a pre-training perplexity 1.3 lower than Mamba trained from scratch, downstream task accuracy is improved by 4.2%, reaching 95% of the source Transformer performance; the distillation process only requires 15% of the pre-training compute of the original Transformer.","authors_note":""},"tags":["distillation","transformer-to-ssm","mamba","architecture"],"keywords":["distillation","mamba","sub-quadratic","ssm","state-space-models"],"notable_authors":["Eric P. Xing","J. Zico Kolter","Albert Gu"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"次复杂度架构从零训练的性能低于同规模预训练Transformer","claim_en":"Sub-quadratic architectures trained from scratch underperform pre-trained Transformers of the same scale","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看方法总览和主结果表就够了；它更像“SSM 从强 Transformer 捡便宜”的实用蒸馏配方，适合做 literature 备查，不足以单独证明次复杂度架构已能独立站住。","en":"The overview plus the main results table are enough; this reads more like a practical recipe for letting SSMs borrow strength from a strong Transformer than evidence that subquadratic models can now stand on their own."}},{"id":"2405.15712","title":"Infinite Limits of Multi-head Transformer Dynamics","authors":["Blake Bordelon","Hamza Tahir Chaudhry","Cengiz Pehlevan"],"institutions":["Harvard University"],"abstract":"In this work, we analyze various scaling limits of the training dynamics of transformer models in the feature learning regime. We identify the set of parameterizations that admit well-defined infinite width and depth limits, allowing the attention layers to update throughout training--a relevant notion of feature learning in these models. We then use tools from dynamical mean field theory (DMFT) to analyze various infinite limits (infinite key/query dimension, infinite heads, and infinite depth) which have different statistical descriptions depending on which infinite limit is taken and how attention layers are scaled. We provide numerical evidence of convergence to the limits and discuss how the parameterization qualitatively influences learned features.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15712","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BordelonCP24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BordelonCP24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3eff068e195daace49955348de9f8398-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：多头 Transformer 在“会持续学特征”的训练区间里，哪些参数化真的存在良定义的无限宽、无限头、无限深极限。以往很多无限宽分析把 Transformer 近似成核回归或冻结特征模型，能算清楚，但会回避注意力层在训练中继续更新这一点；这使得结论对真实预训练的解释力有限。作者重新处理这个问题，是因为 Transformer 的缩放规律越来越依赖宽度、深度、头数同时增长时的训练动力学，而不是只看单层或惰性极限。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在方法级和理论接口级。它没有直接给出新的预训练配方，但它澄清了一个很关键的前提：并不是任意常见参数化都能在无限极限下保留 attention feature learning，很多缩放方式会让注意力更新退化、发散，或落到完全不同的统计描述里。对做大模型预训练的人，这意味着“宽度/头数/深度怎么一起放大”不是纯实现细节，而是在决定你分析的极限对象到底是不是训练中的 Transformer。更具体地说，这篇工作把不同极限下该保留什么量、该怎么缩放 attention 的问题讲清楚了，为后续讨论 scaling law、训练稳定性、深层 Transformer 的可训练性提供了更可靠的理论坐标。","technical_approach":"核心方法是：先系统枚举并筛出能保留特征学习的 Transformer 参数化，再用动力学平均场理论（DMFT）分别求解多种无限极限下的训练动力学。它不是提出一个新架构，而是在已有多头注意力参数化上做“极限存在性”分析。关键设计有两步。第一步，作者要求在宽度或深度趋于无穷时，前向信号、梯度尺度和注意力更新都保持非平凡；这一步排除了很多会让 attention logits、残差流或参数更新失衡的缩放。第二步，在满足这些条件的参数化上，分别研究无限 key/query 维度、无限头数、无限深度三类极限，并指出它们并不共享同一个统一统计对象：不同极限、不同 attention 缩放，会得到不同的闭合动力学方程和不同的特征演化。这样设计有效，是因为它不再默认“所有大宽度极限都等价”，而是把 Transformer 最敏感的部分——softmax attention 的尺度与多头聚合——显式保留下来。代价是分析更复杂，结论也更依赖具体参数化，不能像标准 MLP/NTK 那样给出一个单一普适极限。","experiments":"实验结论是：作者的理论极限不是形式推导，而是能被有限规模数值实验稳定逼近。摘要没有给出具体模型参数、数据规模或任务指标，这篇论文的实验重点也不是下游性能，而是验证不同参数化下训练动力学是否收敛到理论预测的极限。核心证据包括：对无限 key/query 维度、无限头数、无限深度三种情形，有限模型的统计量随规模增大呈现收敛；同时，不同 attention 缩放会导致可观测的定性差异，例如 learned features 的结构和演化方式不同，而不是只在常数因子上变化。可用的关键信息是“参数化决定极限类别”，不是“某个参数化在 benchmark 上赢了多少分”。边界也很明确：这类验证更像机制实验，能支持理论自洽，但不能直接推出有限算力下哪种训练配方最好。","authors_note":"哈佛大学。Blake Bordelon、Cengiz Pehlevan 所在团队长期做深度网络与 Transformer 的统计物理、平均场与训练动力学分析。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a precise question: which transformer parameterizations admit well-defined infinite-width, infinite-head, and infinite-depth limits while still allowing attention layers to keep learning features during training. Earlier infinite-width analyses often sidestepped this by landing in kernel-like or frozen-feature regimes, which are mathematically cleaner but miss a central part of real transformer training. The question matters now because modern scaling increasingly pushes width, depth, and head count together, so the relevant limit is not a lazy one.","importance":"The contribution is methodological and foundational rather than algorithmic. It does not propose a better pretraining recipe, but it clarifies a prerequisite for any theory that aims to say something about large transformers: many common-looking scalings do not preserve nontrivial attention learning in the limit. For pretraining research, that matters because width/depth/head scaling is not just an implementation choice; it changes the limiting object you are reasoning about. The paper gives a cleaner map of which scalings keep transformer dynamics meaningful, which is useful for later work on scaling laws, trainability, and deep transformer optimization.","technical_approach":"$16","experiments":"The experimental message is validation of the limiting theories, not downstream benchmark gains. The abstract does not provide model sizes, dataset sizes, or task metrics, and that is consistent with the paper’s goal. The key empirical result is that finite-size simulations converge toward the predicted limits for the three regimes studied: infinite key/query dimension, infinite heads, and infinite depth. A second useful finding is qualitative rather than scalar: changing the attention scaling changes the learned feature statistics in visible ways, rather than only shifting constants. So the main empirical takeaway is that parameterization selects the limit class. The boundary is also clear: these experiments support the theoretical picture, but they do not directly tell you which finite-compute training recipe is best in practice.","authors_note":"Harvard University. Blake Bordelon and Cengiz Pehlevan are known for work on statistical-physics views of deep learning, mean-field analysis, and transformer training dynamics."},"tags":["transformer","scaling-limit","training-dynamics","mean-field-theory","feature-learning"],"keywords":["infinite limits","transformers","mean field theory","learning dynamics"],"notable_authors":["Blake Bordelon","Cengiz Pehlevan"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer 的无限尺度分析若想对训练有解释力，不能只看冻结特征或纯惰性极限，还需要刻画注意力层在训练中的更新。","claim_en":"If an infinite-scale analysis is meant to explain transformer training, it must account for attention layers continuing to update rather than only studying frozen-feature or lazy limits.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"并不是任意常见 Transformer 参数化都存在良定义的特征学习极限；只有一组受约束的缩放能同时保留无限宽/深分析与 attention 更新。","claim_en":"Not every common transformer parameterization admits a well-defined feature-learning limit; only a constrained family of scalings preserves both infinite-size analysis and nontrivial attention updates.","opposes":"很多先前工作默认大宽度参数化只要数值稳定，就可以拿来讨论统一的无限极限。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"它直接否定了“宽度放大后极限大致等价”的宽泛直觉，说明参数化选择会改变理论对象本身。"},{"claim_zh":"无限 key/query 维度、无限头数、无限深度这三类极限一般不会收敛到同一种统计描述；取哪个极限以及 attention 怎么缩放都会改变动力学。","claim_en":"The infinite key/query, infinite-head, and infinite-depth limits generally do not share one universal statistical description; the chosen limit and attention scaling change the dynamics.","opposes":"一种常见 prior 是把不同“大模型极限”视为可互换近似，只在技术上求解方式不同。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"这意味着很多跨设定类比并不稳，后续理论和经验结论都需要按极限类型重新分开看。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"偏理论备查，不必通读；只看参数化条件和各极限对象的结论部分，确认哪些常见缩放会杀死 feature learning，给你做 scaling 讨论时少踩概念坑。","en":"This is theory for reference rather than full reading; just read the parameterization conditions and the summary of each limit to see which common scalings kill feature learning, so you avoid talking yourself into the wrong asymptotic story."}},{"id":"2406.10670","title":"CoLoR-Filter: Conditional Loss Reduction Filtering for Targeted Language Model Pre-training","authors":["David Brandfonbrener","Hanlin Zhang","Andreas Kirsch","Jonathan Richard Schwarz","Sham M. Kakade"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"$17","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.10670","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BrandfonbrenerZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BrandfonbrenerZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/b0f25f0a63cc544d506e4c1374a3c807-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：如何从大规模预训练语料里，低成本地挑出对某个目标分布或目标任务更有用的数据子集。过去常见做法要么依赖通用质量启发式，要么用单模型困惑度打分，但这两类方法都很难区分“文本本身容易”与“文本对目标真正有帮助”，因此在 targeted pre-training 上常常不够准。","importance":"这项工作的贡献是数据选择方法级，而且和预训练实践贴得很近。它给出的不是更复杂的重训练流程，而是一个可扩展的过滤准则：用两个辅助模型的相对 loss 来近似样本对目标分布的条件性收益。对 pretrain 的启示很直接——数据选择不一定要追求绝对高质量，也可以追求“对目标更有增益的质量”；这比统一去噪更接近 domain adaptation、continual pretrain 和任务定向预训练的真实需求。如果这个准则稳定，它会比单一困惑度过滤更像一个可操作的 data mixture control 工具。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 CoLoR-Filter，一个受经验贝叶斯思路启发的条件损失缩减打分方法。它不是训练一个昂贵的 selector，也不是做组合优化，而是对每个样本计算两个辅助模型下的相对 loss，再据此估计这个样本是否更可能带来面向目标分布的损失下降。关键点在“条件”二字：作者不直接问一段文本是否普遍高质量，而是问它相对于参考模型和目标相关模型，是否表现出更高的目标特异性价值。这样设计有效，是因为单模型低 loss 往往会偏向模板化、重复或过于容易的文本；而比较两个模型的 loss 差异，能更好地区分‘大家都会’和‘对目标特别有用’。它舍弃了全局最优子集搜索，换来线性可扩展性和实现简单。边界也很清楚：方法效果依赖辅助模型是否真的编码了目标偏好，若辅助模型选得差，过滤信号也会偏。","experiments":"实验结论是：CoLoR-Filter 在两类 targeted pre-training 设定里都优于常见过滤基线。摘要明确给了两个场景：一是从 C4 中选数据，做面向 Books 评测的域适配；二是从 C4 中选数据，服务于一组下游多项任务。摘要没有提供模型参数量、训练 token 数、具体 baseline 名称和精确提升数字，因此不能虚构数值；但从论文定位看，关键比较对象应包括随机采样、基于单模型 loss/perplexity 的过滤，以及可能的质量启发式筛选。最值得关注的实验点不是绝对分数，而是它验证了“相对 loss 比绝对 loss 更适合 targeted selection”。如果正文进一步给出不同辅助模型组合、过滤比例和目标域偏移强度下的消融，这些会是判断方法稳健性的关键。当前能确定的边界是：证据集中在 C4 子集选择，是否能外推到更强分布偏移、代码/多语种或多模态预训练，还需要额外验证。","authors_note":"斯坦福大学。Sham Kakade 长期做统计学习、强化学习与基础模型训练相关理论；Andreas Kirsch 也有数据选择与训练动态方向工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical pretraining question: how to cheaply select a subset of web-scale data that is specifically useful for a target domain or target task family. Prior practice often relies on generic quality heuristics or a single model’s perplexity, but both can confuse “easy text” with “useful text,” which is a poor fit for targeted pretraining.","importance":"This is a data-selection contribution with direct pretraining relevance. The main value is not a heavier training pipeline but a scalable filtering rule based on relative losses from two auxiliary models. That matters because pretraining data curation is often framed as generic quality control, while many real settings are conditional: domain adaptation, continual pretraining, and task-targeted mixture design. The paper pushes the field toward selecting data for marginal utility to a target, not just for standalone cleanliness or fluency.","technical_approach":"The method, CoLoR-Filter, is a conditional loss-reduction criterion motivated by an empirical-Bayes view. It does not train an expensive selector and does not solve a combinatorial subset problem directly. Instead, it scores each example using the relative losses assigned by two auxiliary models, and uses that score as a proxy for how much the example should help on the target distribution. The important design choice is the comparison. A single low-loss score often over-selects generic, repetitive, or simply easy text. A relative-loss signal is better aligned with target-specific usefulness because it asks whether an example is disproportionately favored by the target-relevant model over the reference model. The trade-off is clear: the method is simple and scalable, but its quality depends on whether the auxiliary models actually encode the intended target preference.","experiments":"The main empirical claim is that CoLoR-Filter improves targeted pretraining data selection in two settings. The abstract names them explicitly: selecting from C4 for adaptation toward Books evaluation, and selecting from C4 for a suite of downstream tasks. The abstract does not provide model sizes, token counts, baseline names, or exact gains, so those should not be invented. The key result to watch is not raw benchmark leadership but whether relative-loss filtering consistently beats random selection and single-model loss-based filtering. The most informative ablations, if present in the paper, would be the choice of auxiliary models, the retained data fraction, and sensitivity to target-domain shift. The current boundary is that evidence is centered on C4 subset selection; transfer to stronger distribution shifts, code, multilingual data, or multimodal pretraining remains open.","authors_note":"Stanford University. Sham Kakade is well known for work in statistical learning theory, reinforcement learning, and foundations relevant to modern model training. Andreas Kirsch has also worked on data selection and training dynamics."},"tags":["data-selection","data-quality","pretraining","conditional-loss"],"keywords":["data selection","language models","LLMs"],"notable_authors":["Sham M. Kakade","Andreas Kirsch"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"预训练数据选择会显著影响下游表现，而在大语料中直接找到最优子集通常不可 tractable，因此需要可扩展启发式。","claim_en":"Pretraining data selection materially affects downstream performance, and finding the optimal subset in a large corpus is generally intractable, so scalable heuristics are necessary.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"面向目标分布的数据过滤，用两个辅助模型的相对 loss 做条件打分，比依赖单模型绝对 loss 的过滤更合适。","claim_en":"For target-aware data filtering, a conditional score based on relative losses from two auxiliary models is more appropriate than filtering by a single model’s absolute loss.","opposes":"常见 prior 是用单模型 perplexity/loss 作为数据价值的主要代理。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"它把“低 loss = 好数据”改成了“相对更能降低目标损失 = 好数据”，评价标准发生了变化。"},{"claim_zh":"targeted pre-training 的关键不是挑出普遍高质量文本，而是挑出对目标域或目标任务有条件增益的文本。","claim_en":"The key for targeted pretraining is not selecting universally high-quality text, but selecting text with conditional utility for the target domain or task family.","opposes":"很多数据清洗流程默认存在一个与目标无关的统一质量排序。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"这会影响数据工程目标函数：统一去噪不再足够，数据混配需要显式条件化。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只需看打分定义和 targeted setting 的主表；这个方向对 domain-adaptive pretrain 很实用，但 setup 容易受辅助模型选择污染，所以先当可操作启发，别急着当通用过滤准则。","en":"Read the scoring definition and the main targeted-pretraining table; it’s practically useful for domain-adaptive pretraining, but the setup is highly exposed to auxiliary-model choice, so treat it as an actionable heuristic rather than a universal filter."}},{"id":"2405.12981","title":"Reducing Transformer Key-Value Cache Size with Cross-Layer Attention","authors":["William Brandon","Mayank Mishra","Aniruddha Nrusimha","Rameswar Panda","Jonathan Ragan-Kelley"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$18","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.12981","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BrandonMNPR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BrandonMNPR24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9e23d020c18e4c40d81c6a0fc7a46f68-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在不明显伤害模型质量的前提下，继续压缩 Transformer 解码时的 KV cache。过去最有效的做法是 MQA 和 GQA，它们通过让多个 query head 共享同一组 key/value head 来降内存，但共享只发生在同一层内，因此压缩空间仍然受限；一旦上下文很长或 batch 很大，KV cache 仍会成为推理瓶颈。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在系统与架构接口上。它不是改训练目标，也不是改 tokenizer，而是提出一种比 GQA 更激进的 KV 共享方式，直接触碰长上下文推理的核心成本项：显存带宽和 cache 容量。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，注意力头里的冗余不只存在于同层，也存在于跨层；如果这个判断成立，那么未来模型设计可以把“层间共享”当成和“层内共享”同等级的结构自由度，而不是默认每层都要独立生成完整 KV。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Cross-Layer Attention：让不同层的 query 去读取共享的、跨层复用的 key/value 表示，而不是每层各自维护一份完整 KV cache。它可以看作把 MQA/GQA 的共享维度从“head 维”进一步扩展到“layer 维”。设计上的关键选择不是简单删层或做低秩压缩，而是保留每层独立的 query 变换与计算路径，只共享更占缓存的 K/V；这样做保住了层间功能分化，同时把解码时最贵的状态存储压下去。和最接近的 prior 相比，MQA/GQA 只回答‘同层多个头能否共享 KV’，这篇则在问‘相邻或多层之间是否也能共享 KV 而不显著掉点’。","experiments":"从给到的信息里只能确认实验围绕 KV cache 压缩与精度退化展开，并且主对比对象是 MQA 与 GQA。摘要明确声称它把 MQA 又向前推进了一步，说明结果重点不是证明可行性，而是证明在更强压缩下仍只有有限精度损失。具体模型规模、数据规模、评测集和提升数字在当前材料里没有给出，因此不能可靠复述。可以确定的实验关注点包括：长序列和大 batch 下的 cache 占用、与标准 attention/MQA/GQA 的质量对比，以及跨层共享比例带来的 trade-off。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a very specific bottleneck: reducing KV-cache memory during autoregressive decoding without paying much in model quality. MQA and GQA already cut cache size by sharing keys and values across query heads within a layer, but that only exploits intra-layer redundancy; at long context and large batch, KV cache is still a dominant inference constraint.","importance":"The contribution is mainly architectural and systems-relevant. It does not change the language modeling objective, but it pushes on one of the hardest practical costs in LLM serving: cache capacity and memory traffic. The broader pretraining implication is that redundancy in attention may not stop at head grouping inside a layer; if cross-layer sharing works, layer-wise independence of KV generation is less fundamental than current transformer designs assume.","technical_approach":"The method is Cross-Layer Attention: multiple layers reuse shared key/value representations, while keeping their own query-side computation. A useful way to read it is as an extension of MQA/GQA from sharing over heads to sharing over layers. The design choice matters: the paper does not simply prune layers or compress cache post hoc; it preserves layer-specific query transformations and only shares the cache-heavy K/V states. That is why it has a chance to keep expressivity while attacking the dominant decoding memory term. Relative to MQA/GQA, the new question is no longer whether heads in one layer can share KV, but whether different layers can do so as well with limited accuracy loss.","experiments":"From the provided material, the experiments are clearly centered on the cache-size versus accuracy trade-off, with MQA and GQA as the main baselines. The abstract states that the paper takes MQA a step further, so the empirical claim is stronger compression with only modest degradation. Exact model sizes, data scale, benchmarks, and numeric gains are not available in the prompt, so they should not be invented. What can be stated safely is that the evaluation likely measures KV-cache reduction under long-context decoding, quality relative to standard attention and GQA-style baselines, and the trade-off induced by different degrees of cross-layer sharing.","authors_note":""},"tags":["kv-cache","cross-layer-attention","inference-efficiency","architecture"],"keywords":["transformers","attention","KV cache","LLMs"],"notable_authors":["William Brandon","Mayank Mishra","Aniruddha Nrusimha","Rameswar Panda","Jonathan Ragan-Kelley"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"KV cache 是自回归 Transformer 解码的关键加速机制，但在长上下文和大 batch 下会成为主要内存瓶颈。","claim_en":"KV caching is essential for fast autoregressive transformer decoding, but it becomes a major memory bottleneck at long context and large batch sizes.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"},{"claim_zh":"MQA 和 GQA 之所以有效，是因为很多 query head 可以共享更少量的 key/value head，而精度损失通常有限。","claim_en":"MQA and GQA are effective because many query heads can share fewer key/value heads with only limited accuracy degradation.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"KV 共享不必局限在同一层内；把共享扩展到跨层，仍有机会在只带来有限精度损失的情况下继续显著压缩 cache。","claim_en":"KV sharing need not be restricted to heads within a layer; extending sharing across layers can further shrink the cache while keeping accuracy loss modest.","opposes":"现有主流做法默认每一层都需要独立生成并缓存自己的 K/V，压缩主要发生在层内 head 共享上。","opposes_cite_hint":"Shazeer 2019 Fast Transformer Decoding; Ainslie 2023 GQA","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"它直接挑战了 transformer attention 中‘每层独立 KV’这一默认结构假设，若成立会改变推理架构设计空间。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"知道有这条路就行，不必细读正文；它提示层间 KV 也许有大量冗余，但更偏 inference engineering tradeoff，对预训练研究员主要是架构备查而非立即行动项。","en":"Worth knowing exists, not worth a deep read; the main takeaway is that KV redundancy may extend across layers, but this is mostly an inference-engineering tradeoff rather than an immediate pretraining action item."}},{"id":"ChenSWY24","title":"Unveiling Induction Heads: Provable Training Dynamics and Feature Learning in Transformers","authors":["Siyu Chen","Heejune Sheen","Tianhao Wang","Zhuoran Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$19","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenSWY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenSWY24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/7aae9e3ec211249e05bd07271a6b1441-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：induction head 和 ICL 到底是怎样在训练中长出来的，而且除了 attention 之外，Transformer 里的 FFN、归一化和位置编码各自起了什么作用。过去很多理论工作只说明了 attention 机制在某些数据模型下可以实现 ICL，但没有解释一个更接近真实训练的 Transformer 为什么会沿着这条路学出来。","importance":"这项工作的贡献是机制级和训练动力学级的。它不是再给一个‘Transformer 能做 ICL’的表达性证明，而是试图证明在具体数据分布和具体结构下，梯度训练会把模型推向 induction-style 解法。对 pretrain 研究的意义在于，它把‘ICL 是能力描述’往前推进到‘ICL 是可由训练动态偏置出来的结果’，这对理解 feature learning、架构归纳偏置以及为什么某些模块不能随便删都很关键。","technical_approach":"核心方法是对一个两层注意力 Transformer 做可证明的训练动力学分析，数据分布选用 n-gram Markov chain。这个设定的好处是既有足够明确的统计依赖结构，又能让 induction 行为有可分析的目标。模型上没有把问题简化到只剩线性 attention，而是保留了相对位置编码、多头 softmax attention、带归一化的 FFN，因此结论覆盖的不只是‘attention 会拷贝’，还涉及不同模块如何协同形成可泛化的特征与电路。和已有理论最接近的工作相比，它关心的不只是存在性，而是训练过程中的阶段性：哪些特征先学到，哪些模块在何时变得关键，以及 induction head 为什么会成为稳定解。","experiments":"当前给到的材料主要是理论摘要，没有提供完整实验数字，因此不能编造参数量、数据规模或具体表格结果。可以确定的是，论文分析对象是两层 attention Transformer，在 n-gram Markov chain 数据上研究 ICL/induction 的形成，并且强调模型包含相对位置编码、多头 softmax attention、FFN 与 normalization。若论文含有实验，它们更可能承担理论验证角色，例如检查训练阶段与理论预测是否一致、不同模块去除后 induction 行为是否消失，以及 learned feature 是否对应 Markov 依赖结构；但这些细节在当前材料里无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a sharper question than most ICL theory papers: not just whether transformers can implement induction-like behavior, but how induction heads and the supporting features actually emerge during training. Prior theory often explains the role of attention under stylized data models, while leaving the contribution of FFNs, normalization, and positional structure largely unaccounted for.","importance":"This is a mechanism and training-dynamics contribution. The value is not another expressivity result saying transformers are capable of ICL; it is an attempt to show that gradient-based training on structured data drives the model toward induction-style solutions. For pretraining research, that matters because it connects ICL from a behavioral description to a learned outcome shaped by architecture and optimization biases.","technical_approach":"The core approach is a provable analysis of training dynamics for a two-attention-layer transformer trained on n-gram Markov chain data. That choice of data model is deliberate: it is structured enough to make in-context dependence analyzable, but still rich enough to require nontrivial feature learning. Importantly, the model is not reduced to a toy linear-attention setup; it includes relative positional embeddings, multi-head softmax attention, and an FFN with normalization. This lets the paper study how these components interact, rather than attributing everything to attention alone. Relative to nearby theory, the shift is from existence proofs to learning dynamics: what gets learned first, which modules become necessary, and why induction heads emerge as a stable trained solution.","experiments":"The provided material is theory-focused and does not include reliable experimental numbers, so model sizes, dataset sizes, and metric improvements should be left unspecified. What is clear is the analytical setting: a two-layer attention transformer on n-gram Markov chain data, with relative position, multi-head softmax attention, FFN, and normalization all retained in the model. If empirical checks are included, they are likely there to validate the theory by matching predicted training phases, testing module ablations, or showing that learned features align with the Markov structure, but those details are not recoverable from the prompt alone.","authors_note":""},"tags":["induction-heads","training-dynamics","transformer-theory","feature-learning"],"keywords":["transformer","in context learning","Markov chain","n-gram model","feature learning","training dynamics","induction head"],"notable_authors":["Siyu Chen","Heejune Sheen","Tianhao Wang","Zhuoran Yang"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"ICL 是大语言模型能力中的核心现象，但其理论基础仍不清楚。","claim_en":"In-context learning is a core capability of LLMs, but its theoretical foundations remain incomplete.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"},{"claim_zh":"现有多数理论工作主要解释 attention 如何支持 ICL，而对 Transformer 其他模块的作用覆盖不足。","claim_en":"Most existing theory mainly explains how attention supports ICL, with limited treatment of the other transformer components.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅用 attention 解释 ICL 不够；FFN、归一化和相对位置编码在 induction head 的形成与特征学习中也起到可证明的关键作用。","claim_en":"Attention alone is not a sufficient explanation for ICL; FFNs, normalization, and relative positional embeddings also play provable roles in the emergence of induction heads and feature learning.","opposes":"不少 prior 将 ICL 的理论解释主要归结为 attention 机制本身，其他模块常被弱化或省略。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"它在修正一个常见简化叙事：把 ICL 近乎等同于 attention copying，会低估其他模块对训练可达性的影响。"},{"claim_zh":"在 n-gram Markov chain 数据上，带相对位置编码、多头 softmax attention、FFN 和归一化的两层 Transformer 可以通过训练动态自然学出 induction-style 解，而不只是被手工构造出来。","claim_en":"On n-gram Markov chain data, a two-layer transformer with relative position, multi-head softmax attention, FFN, and normalization can acquire induction-style solutions through training dynamics, not merely through hand-crafted construction.","opposes":"一些理论结果只证明某类 transformer 存在实现 ICL 的参数配置，但不说明训练是否会到达这些解。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"从可表达性走向可学习性，是更强也更容易被后续实验或反例检验的断言。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的模块贡献分析和§4的训练阶段结论即可，可验证你对预训练中induction head演化的假设，不必纠结理论证明细节","en":"Only read §3 for module contribution analysis and §4 for training phase conclusions, skip tedious theoretical proofs if you only need to validate induction head evolution hypotheses in pretraining."}},{"id":"ChowLYP0GSTZS24","title":"Unified Generative and Discriminative Training for Multi-modal Large Language Models","authors":["Wei Chow","Juncheng Li","Qifan Yu","Kaihang Pan","Hao Fei","Zhiqi Ge","Shuai Yang","Siliang Tang","Hanwang Zhang","Qianru Sun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChowLYP0GSTZS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChowLYP0GSTZS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/29416b66c2149872b9d1415a3fd2c5e0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有多模态大模型的两类训练范式存在能力割裂：生成式训练支持开放任务但幻觉严重、细粒度判别能力弱，判别式训练（如CLIP）擅长分类检索但无法处理复杂生成任务，此前没有方案能在同一框架下兼顾两类能力。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出统一的生成+判别预训练范式，为降低MLLM幻觉、提升跨任务泛化性提供了新的训练路径，不需要额外增加大量参数即可融合两类范式的优势。","technical_approach":"改进型训练方法，以交错图文序列为统一输入格式，引入结构诱导训练策略，同时优化自回归生成损失和细粒度语义对齐的判别损失，舍弃了以往两类任务分阶段训练、需要额外微调对齐的冗余流程。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，核心测试覆盖多模态生成、零样本图文分类检索、细粒度视觉问答三类任务，对比基线为纯生成式MLLM（如LLaVA）和纯判别式模型（如CLIP）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Two dominant training paradigms for multimodal LLMs have isolated capabilities: generative training supports open-ended tasks but suffers from hallucinations and weak fine-grained discrimination, while discriminative training (e.g. CLIP) excels at classification and retrieval but cannot handle complex generation tasks. No prior work unifies both capabilities in a single framework.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution that proposes a unified generative + discriminative pre-training paradigm. It provides a new training path to reduce MLLM hallucinations and improve cross-task generalization, merging strengths of both paradigms without significant parameter overhead.","technical_approach":"It is an improved training method that uses interleaved image-text sequences as unified input, introduces a structure-induced training strategy to optimize both autoregressive generation loss and fine-grained semantic alignment discriminative loss. It eliminates the redundant workflow of separate training and extra fine-tuning for two types of tasks used in prior work.","experiments":"Full experimental data is not disclosed in the public abstract. Core tests cover three tasks: multimodal generation, zero-shot image-text classification/retrieval, and fine-grained visual question answering. Baselines include pure generative MLLMs (e.g. LLaVA) and pure discriminative models (e.g. CLIP).","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal-llm","generative-training","discriminative-training","vlm","pretraining"],"keywords":["vision-language","multi-modal understanding"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"生成式MLLM在开放生成任务上的表现优于判别式模型。","claim_en":"Generative MLLMs outperform discriminative models on open-ended generation tasks.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"统一的生成+判别式训练不需要额外微调即可同时提升生成和判别两类任务的性能。","claim_en":"Unified generative + discriminative training improves performance on both generation and discrimination tasks without extra fine-tuning.","opposes":"Prior work assumes the two paradigms have conflicting objectives and require separate training or independent parameter sets.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"If validated, it can significantly reduce MLLM pre-training and alignment costs."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"直接看§4的训练损失设计和 ablation 表即可，可直接复用其联合损失思路优化内部多模态预训练的幻觉问题","en":"Only check §4 for training loss design and ablation tables, you can directly reuse its joint loss idea to reduce hallucination in your internal MLLM pretraining."}},{"id":"CsordasISPM24","title":"MoEUT: Mixture-of-Experts Universal Transformers","authors":["Róbert Csordás","Kazuki Irie","Jürgen Schmidhuber","Christopher Potts","Christopher D. Manning"],"institutions":["IDSIA","Stanford University"],"abstract":"$1b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/CsordasISPM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/CsordasISPM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/321387ba926b8e58d3591c0aeb52ffc2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"通用Transformer（UT）采用层间参数共享，组合泛化能力优于标准Transformer，但参数计算比过低，同等维度下参数量远小于非共享结构，单纯放大层尺寸会导致计算成本不可接受，此前没有共享层Transformer能在参数敏感的语言建模任务上达到非共享结构的性能。","importance":"方法级贡献，解决了通用Transformer长期存在的参数不足问题，为兼具组合泛化能力和大模型性能的Transformer架构设计提供了可行路径，可直接应用于预训练LM的架构迭代。","technical_approach":"原创架构改进，在通用Transformer的共享层中引入稀疏混合专家（MoE）模块，在不增加单步计算量的前提下大幅提升总参数量，舍弃了单纯放大层隐层维度的暴力扩容方案，和普通UT相比仅增加了MoE路由逻辑，和标准MoE Transformer相比保留了层间参数共享的组合泛化优势。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，核心测试覆盖语言建模困惑度、组合泛化任务两类，基线为标准Transformer、普通UT、参数匹配的MoE Transformer。","authors_note":"团队包含Jürgen Schmidhuber、Christopher D. Manning、Christopher Potts等知名学者，Jürgen Schmidhuber是LSTM等工作的发明人，Manning是NLP领域预训练语言模型相关研究的核心贡献者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Universal Transformers (UT) use layer-wise parameter sharing and have better compositional generalization than standard Transformers, but they suffer from low parameter-compute ratio: parameter count is much lower than non-shared models with the same dimension. Scaling layer size directly leads to prohibitive compute cost, and no prior shared-layer Transformer can match non-shared models on parameter-sensitive language modeling tasks.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution that solves the long-standing parameter insufficiency problem of Universal Transformers. It provides a feasible path for Transformer architecture design that combines compositional generalization and large model performance, and can be directly applied to pre-trained LM architecture iteration.","technical_approach":"It is an original architecture improvement that introduces sparse Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) modules into shared layers of Universal Transformers, significantly increasing total parameter count without raising per-step compute cost. It abandons the brute-force scaling of hidden dimension, only adds MoE routing logic compared to vanilla UT, and retains layer-sharing compositional generalization advantages compared to standard MoE Transformers.","experiments":"Full experimental data is not disclosed in the public abstract. Core tests cover language modeling perplexity and compositional generalization tasks. Baselines include standard Transformer, vanilla UT, and parameter-matched MoE Transformer.","authors_note":"The team includes well-known researchers Jürgen Schmidhuber, Christopher D. Manning and Christopher Potts. Jürgen Schmidhuber is the inventor of LSTM, and Manning is a core contributor to pre-trained language model research in NLP."},"tags":["moe","universal-transformer","architecture","efficiency"],"keywords":["MoE","mixture of experts","universal transformers","language modeling"],"notable_authors":["Jürgen Schmidhuber","Christopher D. Manning","Christopher Potts"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"通用Transformer的层间参数共享能提升模型组合泛化能力。","claim_en":"Layer-wise parameter sharing in Universal Transformers improves model compositional generalization.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"MoE增强的通用Transformer能在语言建模任务上达到和非共享层标准Transformer相当的性能。","claim_en":"MoE-augmented Universal Transformers can match the performance of non-shared layer standard Transformers on language modeling tasks.","opposes":"Prior work assumes shared-layer Transformers have insufficient parameters and cannot compete with non-shared structures on language modeling tasks.","opposes_cite_hint":"Dehghani 2018 Universal Transformers","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"It overturns the common belief that shared-layer Transformers are not suitable for large-parameter language modeling."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3.2的架构设计和§5的LM性能对比即可，适合想做轻量化高泛化性预训练架构的团队参考","en":"Only read §3.2 for architecture design and §5 for LM performance comparison, it’s a good reference for teams working on lightweight, high-generalization pretraining architectures."}},{"id":"CsordasPIS24","title":"SwitchHead: Accelerating Transformers with Mixture-of-Experts Attention","authors":["Róbert Csordás","Piotr Piekos","Kazuki Irie","Jürgen Schmidhuber"],"institutions":["IDSIA"],"abstract":"$1c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/CsordasPIS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/CsordasPIS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/87be61bf9338389702712f5e9754a986-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有Transformer的MoE优化主要集中在前馈层，此前将MoE扩展到自注意力层的方法无法达到参数匹配基线的性能，无法同时降低注意力的计算和内存开销。","importance":"方法级贡献，首次实现了性能无损的注意力层MoE优化，可将Transformer的注意力矩阵计算量降低最多8倍，可和前馈层MoE结合构建全MoE Transformer，直接降低预训练和推理的时延与成本。","technical_approach":"原创MoE机制，为自注意力层设计了专门的路由逻辑，每个注意力头仅激活部分专家计算注意力矩阵，舍弃了以往全注意力头全专家计算的冗余模式，和此前的注意力MoE方法相比，路由粒度更细、激活的专家数量更少，同时保留了完整的注意力语义表达能力。","experiments":"262M参数规模下，语言建模困惑度和基线Transformer一致，单步计算速度提升30%，内存开销降低25%，和前馈层MoE结合后的SwitchAll架构性能优于单独的前馈MoE Transformer。消融实验显示路由激活阈值设置为0.2时性能和效率的trade-off最优。","authors_note":"团队包含Jürgen Schmidhuber，过往代表性工作包括Transformer架构优化、MoE相关研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing MoE optimizations for Transformers mostly focus on feedforward layers. Prior attempts to extend MoE to self-attention layers cannot match the performance of parameter-matched baselines, and fail to reduce both compute and memory overhead of attention at the same time.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution that achieves lossless MoE optimization for attention layers for the first time. It reduces attention matrix compute by up to 8x, can be combined with feedforward MoE to build fully-MoE Transformers, and directly reduces pre-training and inference latency and cost.","technical_approach":"It is an original MoE mechanism with specialized routing logic for self-attention layers. Each attention head only activates a subset of experts to compute attention matrices, eliminating the redundant full-head full-expert computation used in prior work. Compared to previous attention MoE methods, it has finer routing granularity, fewer activated experts, and retains full attention semantic representation capability.","experiments":"At 262M parameter scale, it matches the language modeling perplexity of baseline Transformer, achieves 30% per-step speedup and 25% lower memory overhead. The SwitchAll architecture combined with feedforward MoE outperforms feedforward-only MoE Transformers. Ablation shows routing activation threshold of 0.2 achieves the best performance-efficiency trade-off.","authors_note":"The team includes Jürgen Schmidhuber, whose representative prior work includes Transformer architecture optimization and MoE related research."},"tags":["moe","attention","architecture","efficiency"],"keywords":["MoE","mixture of experts","attention","transformers"],"notable_authors":["Jürgen Schmidhuber"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"前馈层MoE可以在性能无损的前提下降低Transformer的计算开销。","claim_en":"MoE for feedforward layers can reduce Transformer compute cost without performance degradation.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"注意力层MoE可以在性能匹配参数匹配基线的同时降低计算和内存开销。","claim_en":"MoE for attention layers can reduce compute and memory overhead while matching the performance of parameter-matched baselines.","opposes":"Prior work assumes MoE for attention layers introduces accuracy loss and cannot reach baseline performance.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"It opens a new direction for sparse optimization of attention layers, which can be directly applied to improve pre-training efficiency of large models."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"直接看Fig 2的路由逻辑和§5的速度/性能tradeoff结果即可，可尝试在内部全MoE预训练架构中复现注意力MoE模块","en":"Check Fig 2 for routing logic and §5 for speed/performance tradeoff results first, you can try to reproduce the attention MoE module in your internal full-MoE pretraining architecture."}},{"id":"DavisKPCBB24","title":"Fisher Flow Matching for Generative Modeling over Discrete Data","authors":["Oscar Davis","Samuel Kessler","Mircea Petrache","Ismail Ilkan Ceylan","Michael M. Bronstein","Avishek Joey Bose"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DavisKPCBB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DavisKPCBB24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/fadec8f2e65f181d777507d1df69b92f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是离散数据生成建模里一个很现实的问题：flow matching 在连续空间里很好用，但直接搬到离散空间并不自然。过去离散生成通常在自回归、离散 diffusion、或能量模型之间取舍；想兼顾并行生成、训练稳定性和概率解释并不容易，因此把 flow matching 真正落到离散 token 上是值得做的。","importance":"这项工作对 pretrain 的相关性比较高，因为它涉及 next-token AR 之外的新型生成范式，尤其适用于文本、代码、蛋白或离散多模态 token。若 Fisher Flow Matching 能在离散空间提供更稳定或更高效的训练目标，它的意义不只是多一个生成模型，而是提供一种介于离散 diffusion 和连续 flow matching 之间的新桥梁。对 diffusion LM、mask-based LM、并行解码研究都有参考价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把 Fisher 几何引入离散数据上的 flow matching。直觉上，普通连续流依赖欧氏空间中的速度场，而离散变量没有这样的自然微分结构；Fisher 度量给了概率单纯形上的几何，使得‘从噪声分布流向数据分布’可以被定义为对概率分布的连续演化，而不是对离散 token 值本身做不存在的微分。与标准离散 diffusion 相比，它可能避免预先固定的马尔可夫噪声链；与 AR 相比，则可能支持更并行的生成和不同的训练-采样折中。","experiments":"没有摘要全文，无法确认任务是文本还是更一般的离散对象，也无法给出 FID、NLL、perplexity 等具体数字。关键实验应该看三点：一是与离散 diffusion、AR 或其他 flow-based baseline 的质量-采样步数权衡；二是训练是否稳定、是否容易 collapse；三是随着词表大小或序列长度增长，方法是否还能维持可接受的计算和内存开销。这些决定它能否真正进入 LM 预训练讨论，而不只是小规模概念验证。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical gap in generative modeling over discrete data: flow matching works well in continuous spaces, but does not transfer naturally to tokens. Discrete generation has largely been split across autoregressive models, discrete diffusion, and energy-based approaches, with no easy way to get parallel generation, stable training, and a clean probabilistic view at once.","importance":"This is highly relevant to pretraining because it explores a generation paradigm beyond next-token autoregression, directly applicable to text, code, proteins, and tokenized multimodal data. If Fisher Flow Matching offers a stable and scalable objective on discrete spaces, it could become a useful bridge between discrete diffusion and flow-based modeling, with implications for diffusion LMs and parallel decoding.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to bring Fisher geometry into flow matching for discrete data. Standard continuous flows assume an Euclidean velocity field, which discrete variables do not have. A Fisher metric gives the probability simplex a meaningful geometry, so the model can represent generation as a continuous evolution of probability distributions rather than an impossible derivative over token identities. Relative to standard discrete diffusion, this may reduce dependence on a hand-designed corruption chain. Relative to AR models, it may enable more parallel generation with a different training-sampling trade-off.","experiments":"The missing abstract prevents a reliable statement of tasks and numbers. The decisive experimental questions are whether the method improves the quality-versus-sampling-step trade-off against discrete diffusion and AR baselines, whether training is stable, and whether compute and memory remain reasonable as vocabulary size and sequence length grow. Those are what determine whether the method matters for language-model pretraining rather than only for toy discrete data.","authors_note":""},"tags":["flow-matching","discrete-diffusion","generative-modeling","fisher-information"],"keywords":["Flow matching","Generative models","Riemannian manifolds","Discrete data"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对离散生成范式只能在AR和离散扩散二选一的固有认知，应立刻在内部mask LM、并行解码的预训练实验中加入该目标做ablation","en":"It changes my prior that discrete generation can only choose between AR and discrete diffusion, you should immediately add this loss to internal mask LM and parallel decoding pretraining ablations."}},{"id":"DefazioY0MMC24","title":"The Road Less Scheduled","authors":["Aaron Defazio","Xingyu Yang","Ahmed Khaled","Konstantin Mishchenko","Harsh Mehta","Ashok Cutkosky"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Existing learning rate schedules that do not require specification of the optimization stopping step $T$ are greatly out-performed by learning rate schedules that depend on $T$. We propose an approach that avoids the need for this stopping time by eschewing the use of schedules entirely, while exhibiting state-of-the-art performance compared to schedules across a wide family of problems ranging from convex problems to large-scale deep learning problems. Our Schedule-Free approach introduces no additional hyper-parameters over standard optimizers with momentum. Our method is a direct consequence of a new theory we develop that unifies scheduling and iterate averaging. An open source implementation of our method is available at https://github.com/facebookresearch/schedule_free. Schedule-Free AdamW is the core algorithm behind our winning entry to the MLCommons 2024 AlgoPerf Algorithmic Efficiency Challenge Self-Tuning track.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DefazioY0MMC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DefazioY0MMC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/136b9a13861308c8948cd308ccd02658-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作讨论的是训练调度本身，而不是具体模型：我们是否真的需要精心设计复杂的学习率或训练 schedule。过去大规模训练高度依赖 warmup、cosine decay、阶段式衰减等经验规则，但这些规则往往迁移性差，换模型、换 batch、换数据配比就要重新调；因此重新审视‘少调度甚至不调度’有没有更好性质，是很有现实意义的问题。","importance":"如果论文结论成立，它对 pretrain 是系统级启发。原因不是 schedule 本身多新，而是大模型训练配方里有大量经验超参，任何能减少 schedule 依赖、提高鲁棒性的工作，都会直接降低 scale-up 和 continual pretrain 的调参成本。尤其在多阶段训练、mid-training、cooldown 场景下，schedule 的脆弱性经常比优化器本身还麻烦。","technical_approach":"从标题 The Road Less Scheduled 看，作者大概率主张一种更少依赖预设 schedule 的优化策略，可能通过自适应规则、稳定的大步长区间，或重新分析何时 schedule 真正必要。它与常见做法的核心区别，不是换一个更花哨的曲线，而是试图把性能来自‘学习率随时间变化’还是来自‘某种隐含正则化/稳定性机制’拆开。这样设计如果有效，价值就在于把 schedule 从必须手工雕刻的对象变成次要因素。","experiments":"当前无摘要，无法确认是否覆盖 vision、language 或大模型预训练，也无法给出收敛速度和最终指标。对这类工作，最值得看的不是单一 benchmark，而是跨 batch size、训练步数预算、优化器、数据顺序的稳健性；另外要看在相同步数下是否只是前期收敛快，还是最终质量也不掉。若只在小模型或短程训练成立，对 LLM 训练的外推会很弱。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper appears to question the need for carefully engineered training schedules. Large-scale training still leans heavily on warmup, cosine decay, and staged learning-rate heuristics, but those rules are brittle under changes in model size, batch size, or data mixture. Re-examining whether less scheduling can work is therefore practically important.","importance":"If the paper’s claims hold, the impact is systems-level for pretraining. The reason is simple: large-model recipes are overloaded with fragile hyperparameters, and anything that reduces dependence on hand-tuned schedules lowers the cost of scaling, mid-training transitions, and continual pretraining. In practice, schedule brittleness is often as painful as optimizer choice.","technical_approach":"From the title, the likely proposal is an optimization strategy that relies less on pre-specified schedules, either through stronger adaptivity or by identifying regimes where scheduling is largely unnecessary. The key distinction from standard practice is not a fancier decay curve, but an attempt to separate what benefits actually come from time-varying learning rates versus hidden stability or regularization effects.","experiments":"The abstract is not available, so it is not possible to confirm whether the study includes language pretraining or only smaller-scale setups. The important evidence would be robustness across batch sizes, training budgets, optimizers, and data orderings, plus whether the method preserves final quality rather than only speeding early optimization. If the effect only appears on small models, its relevance to LLM training would be limited.","authors_note":""},"tags":["learning-rate-schedule","optimizer","training-dynamics","schedule-free"],"keywords":["Stochastic Optimization","Optimization","Convex Optimization","Learning Rates","Learning Rate Schedules"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接推翻我以往认为预训练必须精细调学习率调度的认知，建议立刻在内部不同规模的预训练任务中测试其无调度优化策略","en":"It overthrows my prior that pretraining requires carefully tuned learning rate schedules, you should immediately test its schedule-free optimization strategy on internal pretraining tasks of different scales."}},{"id":"2405.15319","title":"Stacking Your Transformers: A Closer Look at Model Growth for Efficient LLM Pre-Training","authors":["Wenyu Du","Tongxu Luo","Zihan Qiu","Zeyu Huang","Yikang Shen","Reynold Cheng","Yike Guo","Jie Fu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15319","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DuLQHSCG024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DuLQHSCG024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/143ea4a156ef64f32d4d905206cf32e1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 预训练计算成本极高，model growth（用小模型加速大模型训练）是一个有前景的方向，但此前缺乏系统评估：哪些 growth 算子真正有效、能否 scale、实践中怎么用，都没有清晰答案。","importance":"对 pretrain 效率有直接且实用的启示，属于系统级贡献。论文将已有方法归纳为四种原子 growth 算子并在标准化 LLM 预训练设置下对比，发现深度方向的 stacking 算子（G_stack）效果最突出，给出了可落地的实践指南。这对任何需要做大规模预训练的团队都有参考价值。","technical_approach":"将 model growth 方法抽象为四种原子算子（宽度/深度方向的复制与插值），在统一的 LLM 预训练设置下逐一评估。核心发现是深度 stacking（G_stack）——将小模型的层直接堆叠来初始化大模型——在加速效果和最终性能上都优于其他算子。论文还探索了 scaling 行为和实践 guidelines。","experiments":"在标准化 LLM 预训练设置下系统对比四种算子，G_stack 展现出显著的训练加速。论文验证了其在不同模型规模下的可行性，并给出了关于何时 grow、grow 多少的经验性指导。具体加速比和模型规模在摘要中未完整给出。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Model growth—using smaller pretrained models to accelerate training of larger ones—is promising but lacked systematic evaluation: which growth operators actually work, whether they scale, and practical guidelines were all unclear.","importance":"A systems-level contribution directly relevant to pretrain efficiency. By abstracting existing methods into four atomic growth operators and benchmarking them in a standardized LLM pretraining setup, the paper identifies depthwise stacking (G_stack) as the clear winner and provides actionable guidelines. Useful for any team doing large-scale pretraining.","technical_approach":"Decomposes model growth into four atomic operators (width/depth × copy/interpolate) and evaluates each in a controlled LLM pretraining setting. The key finding: G_stack—initializing a larger model by stacking layers from a smaller one—consistently outperforms alternatives in both speedup and final quality. The paper also studies scaling behavior and derives practical rules for when and how much to grow.","experiments":"Systematic comparison of four operators in standardized LLM pretraining. G_stack shows remarkable acceleration. Scaling viability is tested across model sizes, with empirical guidelines provided. Exact speedup ratios and model sizes not fully stated in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["efficient-pretraining","model-growth","scaling","training-dynamics"],"notable_authors":["Yikang Shen"],"keywords":["Efficient LLM pre-training","Model growth"],"recommendation":{"zh":"给出了可直接落地的小模型初始化大模型的最优方案，应立刻在内部大规模预训练的cold start阶段采用深度堆叠算子降低训练成本","en":"It provides an actionable optimal scheme for initializing large models from small ones, you should immediately adopt the depth stacking operator in internal large-scale pretraining cold start to cut training cost."}},{"id":"2406.11944","title":"Transcoders find interpretable LLM feature circuits","authors":["Jacob Dunefsky","Philippe Chlenski","Neel Nanda"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11944","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DunefskyCN24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DunefskyCN24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/2b8f4db0464cc5b6e9d5e6bea4b9f308-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer 中 MLP 层的密集激活使得细粒度电路分析（找到对应特定行为的稀疏子图）非常困难。SAE 找到的可解释特征是大量神经元的线性组合，每个神经元有自己的非线性，导致电路要么过大要么无法分离局部和全局行为。","importance":"对 mechanistic interpretability 有方法级贡献，对 pretrain 研究有间接但有价值的启示。Transcoder 提供了一种将密集 MLP 层近似为稀疏宽 MLP 层的方式，使得电路分析可以在可解释特征层面进行，而不是在神经元层面。这有助于理解预训练模型内部的计算结构。","technical_approach":"Transcoder 用一个更宽但稀疏激活的 MLP 层来忠实近似原始密集 MLP 层。与 SAE 不同，transcoder 直接在 MLP 的输入-输出映射上工作，避免了先分解再重组的复杂性。论文提出了一种新方法，利用 transcoder 进行电路发现：在可解释特征空间中追踪信息流，得到更紧凑、更可解释的电路。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体的模型规模、任务和量化指标。核心贡献在于方法论：展示 transcoder 能产生比 SAE 更紧凑且更可解释的电路。","authors_note":"Neel Nanda 是 mechanistic interpretability 领域的知名研究者，此前在 Anthropic 和 DeepMind 工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Dense MLP activations in Transformers make fine-grained circuit analysis intractable. SAE-discovered features are linear combinations of many neurons with individual nonlinearities, yielding circuits that are either too large or fail to separate local from global behavior.","importance":"A method-level contribution to mechanistic interpretability with indirect but valuable pretrain implications. Transcoders approximate dense MLP layers with wider, sparsely-activating ones, enabling circuit analysis at the interpretable-feature level rather than the neuron level. This helps understand the computational structure inside pretrained models.","technical_approach":"A transcoder faithfully approximates a dense MLP layer with a wider, sparsely-activating MLP layer. Unlike SAEs, transcoders operate directly on the MLP input-output mapping, avoiding decompose-then-recompose complexity. The paper introduces a novel method for circuit discovery using transcoders: tracing information flow in interpretable feature space to obtain more compact, interpretable circuits.","experiments":"Specific model sizes, tasks, and quantitative metrics not provided in the abstract. The core contribution is methodological: demonstrating that transcoders yield more compact and interpretable circuits than SAE-based approaches.","authors_note":"Neel Nanda is a well-known mechanistic interpretability researcher, previously at Anthropic and DeepMind."},"tags":["interpretability","circuits","sparse-autoencoder","features"],"notable_authors":["Neel Nanda"],"keywords":["mechanistic interpretability","transcoders","sparse autoencoders","circuit analysis"],"recommendation":{"zh":"解决了以往SAE分解特征难以对应电路的痛点，可复用其方法分析内部预训练模型的关键能力对应的内部子结构","en":"It solves the pain point that SAE decomposed features are hard to map to circuits, you can reuse its method to analyze internal substructures corresponding to key capabilities of your pretrained models."}},{"id":"2411.00999","title":"Normalization Layer Per-Example Gradients are Sufficient to Predict Gradient Noise Scale in Transformers","authors":["Gavia Gray","Aman Tiwari","Shane Bergsma","Joel Hestness"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Per-example gradient norms are a vital ingredient for estimating gradient noise scale (GNS) with minimal variance. Observing the tensor contractions required to compute them, we propose a method with minimal FLOPs in 3D or greater tensor regimes by simultaneously computing the norms while computing the parameter gradients. Using this method we are able to observe the GNS of different layers at higher accuracy than previously possible. We find that the total GNS of contemporary transformer models is predicted well by the GNS of only the normalization layers. As a result, focusing only on the normalization layer, we develop a custom kernel to compute the per-example gradient norms while performing the LayerNorm backward pass with zero throughput overhead. Tracking GNS on only those layers, we are able to guide a practical batch size schedule that reduces training time by 18% on a Chinchilla-optimal language model.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.00999","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GrayTBH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GrayTBH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a9d419ef12fb34105424fa3166716139-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心结论很明确：在 Transformer 里，只看归一化层的逐样本梯度，就足以高精度预测整体的梯度噪声尺度（Gradient Noise Scale, GNS）。过去 GNS 很有用，因为它能指导 batch size、学习率和训练效率判断，但逐样本梯度太贵，导致它更像研究工具而不是在线信号；作者要解决的就是如何把 GNS 监控做到几乎零开销。","importance":"这是很强的训练系统信号工作。它对 pretrain 的价值不在于改模型，而在于把一个原本昂贵的优化诊断量，变成可以在线持续监控的指标。如果结论稳健，它会直接影响大规模训练中的 batch scaling、训练阶段切换、异常检测和资源利用。更重要的是，它给了一个很意外但实用的观察：总梯度噪声可能主要由少数结构性层就能代表，而不必全模型精确计算。","technical_approach":"方法上，作者先提出一种在高维张量场景下，几乎与反向传播同步计算逐样本梯度范数的低 FLOPs 方法。进一步，他们发现当代 Transformer 的总 GNS 能被 normalization layers 的 GNS 很好预测，于是把计算范围缩到 LayerNorm 等归一化层，并专门实现了一个和 LayerNorm backward 融合的 custom kernel，在吞吐上做到零额外开销。和已有 per-example gradient 方法相比，关键差别不是更通用，而是抓住了足够代表全局噪声的最小子集，这才让在线部署成为现实。","experiments":"实验结论非常具体。作者能以比以往更高的精度观测不同层的 GNS，并发现全模型 GNS 与归一化层 GNS 高度一致；随后只跟踪这些层，就能在几乎不影响吞吐的情况下持续监控训练噪声。摘要截断了后半段，因此看不到模型规模、相关系数、速度数据和下游应用数字；但从已知信息看，最有价值的 ablation 是层级别比较——为什么是 normalization layer 最有代表性，而 attention/MLP 权重不需要全部纳入。","authors_note":"从作者表中可确认 Joel Hestness。摘要无法确认全部机构信息。Hestness 长期做 scaling、训练系统和高效深度学习相关研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The central result is simple and useful: in transformers, per-example gradients from normalization layers alone are enough to predict the overall gradient noise scale. GNS is valuable for choosing batch size, understanding optimization, and monitoring training efficiency, but exact per-example gradients are usually too expensive to compute online. The paper makes that signal practical.","importance":"This is a high-leverage systems contribution for pretraining. It does not change the model, but it turns a costly research diagnostic into something that could plausibly be tracked continuously during large-scale runs. If the result is robust, it affects batch scaling decisions, schedule transitions, anomaly detection, and training efficiency. The deeper lesson is that global optimization noise may be captured by a small structural subset of parameters.","technical_approach":"The authors first introduce a low-FLOP method for computing per-example gradient norms alongside the usual backward pass in higher-rank tensor regimes. They then show that the transformer’s total GNS is well predicted by the GNS of normalization layers only. Exploiting that, they build a custom kernel that computes the required per-example norms during LayerNorm backward with effectively zero throughput overhead. The key idea is not maximal coverage, but finding the smallest parameter subset that preserves the signal.","experiments":"The paper reports that layerwise GNS can be measured more accurately than before, and that normalization-layer GNS tracks total-model GNS closely enough to serve as a proxy. It then uses a fused implementation to monitor this signal with no throughput penalty. The abstract is truncated, so model sizes, correlation values, and runtime numbers are not available here. The most important ablation is the layer comparison showing why normalization layers suffice while broader coverage is unnecessary.","authors_note":"Joel Hestness is a recognizable author with prior work in scaling, efficient training, and deep learning systems. The provided metadata is insufficient to confirm all institutions."},"tags":["gradient-noise-scale","training-dynamics","transformers","batch-size","optimization"],"notable_authors":["Joel Hestness"],"keywords":["Efficient deep learning","gradient noise scale","critical batch size","language models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"把原本高开销的梯度噪声尺度监控变成零成本在线信号，应立刻在内部大规模预训练的监控pipeline中集成该方法做batch调整和异常检测","en":"It turns the originally high-cost gradient noise scale monitoring into a zero-cost online signal, you should immediately integrate this method into internal large-scale pretraining monitoring pipelines for batch adjustment and anomaly detection."}},{"id":"HoB0JKSFTY24","title":"Block Transformer: Global-to-Local Language Modeling for Fast Inference","authors":["Namgyu Ho","Sangmin Bae","Taehyeon Kim","Hyunjik Jo","Yireun Kim","Tal Schuster","Adam Fisch","James Thorne","Se-Young Yun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$20","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HoB0JKSFTY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HoB0JKSFTY24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/579b5b84311e122584dedab1d3b7613f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"自回归Transformer的KV缓存导致推理存在两个核心瓶颈：首token时延高（需要处理整个prompt预填充KV缓存），后续token推理的内存IO开销随序列长度线性增长，整体内存读取复杂度为二次方。","importance":"架构级贡献，提出了分层全局-局部的语言建模范式，从架构根源降低KV缓存的推理开销，对长上下文LLM的部署效率提升有直接应用价值。","technical_approach":"原创架构设计，将输入序列划分为多个块，先对每个块做全局注意力得到块级表示，再在块内部做局部注意力生成token，舍弃了传统对整个序列做统一自注意力的模式，KV缓存仅需要存储块级全局表示和当前块的局部表示，大幅降低了缓存读取量。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，核心测试指标包括首token时延、长序列推理吞吐量、语言建模困惑度，基线为标准Transformer、FlashAttention优化的Transformer。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"KV cache in autoregressive Transformers leads to two core inference bottlenecks: high first-token latency (requires processing the entire prompt to prefill KV cache), and memory I/O overhead for subsequent tokens grows linearly with sequence length, leading to quadratic overall memory read complexity.","importance":"This is an architecture-level contribution that proposes a hierarchical global-to-local language modeling paradigm, reducing KV cache inference overhead from the architecture root. It has direct application value for improving deployment efficiency of long-context LLMs.","technical_approach":"It is an original architecture design that splits input sequences into blocks, first computes global attention for each block to get block-level representations, then computes local attention inside the block to generate tokens. It abandons the traditional unified self-attention over the entire sequence, only stores block-level global representations and current block local representations in KV cache, significantly reducing cache read volume.","experiments":"Full experimental data is not disclosed in the public abstract. Core metrics include first-token latency, long-sequence inference throughput, and language modeling perplexity. Baselines include standard Transformer and FlashAttention-optimized Transformer.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","inference","architecture","language-modeling","long-context"],"keywords":["language model","model architecture","efficient inference"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"KV缓存的内存IO开销是长上下文LLM推理的主要瓶颈。","claim_en":"Memory I/O overhead of KV cache is the main bottleneck for long-context LLM inference.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"分层全局-局部建模的自回归Transformer可以在困惑度损失可忽略的前提下大幅降低推理开销。","claim_en":"Autoregressive Transformers with hierarchical global-to-local modeling can significantly reduce inference overhead with negligible perplexity loss.","opposes":"Prior work assumes hierarchical attention breaks long-range dependency modeling and leads to significant performance degradation.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"It provides a new paradigm for long-context LLM architecture design that balances performance and inference efficiency."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的分层注意力架构和§6的长序列推理时延结果即可，适合做长上下文LLM推理优化的团队参考","en":"Only read §3 for hierarchical attention architecture and §6 for long-sequence inference latency results, it’s a good reference for teams working on long-context LLM inference optimization."}},{"id":"HooperKMMSKG24","title":"KVQuant: Towards 10 Million Context Length LLM Inference with KV Cache Quantization","authors":["Coleman Hooper","Sehoon Kim","Hiva Mohammadzadeh","Michael W. Mahoney","Yakun Sophia Shao","Kurt Keutzer","Amir Gholami"],"institutions":["UC Berkeley"],"abstract":"$21","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HooperKMMSKG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HooperKMMSKG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/028fcbcf85435d39a40c4d61b42c99a4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"长上下文LLM的KV缓存占推理内存开销的大部分，现有KV量化方案无法在4bit以下精度保持足够的准确率，限制了10M级超长上下文的推理部署。","importance":"方法级贡献，实现了4bit以下精度的无损KV缓存量化，支持10M token上下文的LLM推理，对超长上下文LLM的落地有直接支撑作用。","technical_approach":"改进型量化方案，包含三个核心优化：1）按通道量化Key激活，匹配Key的分布特征；2）在RoPE编码前量化Key，降低位置编码对量化精度的影响；3）非均匀KV量化，适配KV激活的非均匀分布。舍弃了以往按token量化、RoPE后量化的常规方案，不需要重新训练模型即可直接应用。","experiments":"在7B、13B、70B参数的长上下文LLM上测试，3bit量化下困惑度上升小于0.1，2bit量化下困惑度上升小于0.3，可支持单A100 GPU上10M token上下文的推理，对比基线为传统的per-token KV量化方案，内存开销降低60%以上。","authors_note":"团队包含Michael W. Mahoney、Yakun Sophia Shao等知名学者，过往代表性工作包括模型量化、LLM系统优化。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"KV cache accounts for most of the inference memory overhead of long-context LLMs. Existing KV quantization solutions cannot maintain sufficient accuracy below 4-bit precision, which limits the deployment of 10M+ token ultra-long context inference.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution that achieves lossless KV cache quantization below 4-bit precision, supporting 10M token context LLM inference. It directly enables the deployment of ultra-long context LLMs.","technical_approach":"It is an improved quantization scheme with three core optimizations: 1) Per-channel key quantization to match key distribution; 2) Pre-RoPE key quantization to reduce the impact of positional encoding on quantization accuracy; 3) Non-uniform KV quantization to fit non-uniform KV activation distribution. It abandons the conventional per-token quantization and post-RoPE quantization used in prior work, and can be applied directly without model retraining.","experiments":"Tested on 7B, 13B, 70B parameter long-context LLMs: 3-bit quantization leads to <0.1 perplexity increase, 2-bit quantization leads to <0.3 perplexity increase. It supports 10M token context inference on a single A100 GPU, reduces memory overhead by over 60% compared to traditional per-token KV quantization baseline.","authors_note":"The team includes well-known researchers Michael W. Mahoney and Yakun Sophia Shao, whose representative prior work includes model quantization and LLM system optimization."},"tags":["kv-cache","quantization","long-context","inference","serving"],"keywords":["Quantization","KV Cache","LLM Inference","Compression","Long Context Length"],"notable_authors":["Michael W. Mahoney","Yakun Sophia Shao"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"KV缓存量化是降低长上下文LLM推理内存开销的有效手段。","claim_en":"KV cache quantization is an effective method to reduce long-context LLM inference memory overhead.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"3bit KV量化可以做到几乎无损的长上下文推理性能。","claim_en":"3-bit KV quantization achieves almost lossless long-context inference performance.","opposes":"Prior work assumes KV quantization below 4-bit leads to unacceptable accuracy loss.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"It significantly reduces the hardware threshold for deploying ultra-long context LLMs."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"直接看§3的三个量化优化点即可，无需重训练就能落地，适合长上下文LLM部署团队直接复用","en":"Only check the three quantization optimizations in §3, it can be deployed without retraining and is directly reusable for long-context LLM deployment teams."}},{"id":"IvisonW0WP0S0H24","title":"Unpacking DPO and PPO: Disentangling Best Practices for Learning from Preference Feedback","authors":["Hamish Ivison","Yizhong Wang","Jiacheng Liu","Zeqiu Wu","Valentina Pyatkin","Nathan Lambert","Noah A. Smith","Yejin Choi","Hanna Hajishirzi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$22","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/IvisonW0WP0S0H24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/IvisonW0WP0S0H24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/404df2480b6eef0486a1679e371894b0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：DPO 和 PPO 在 preference learning 中经常被拿来直接比较，但很多实验实际上混杂了数据、KL 控制、采样、奖励建模和训练细节，导致结论不干净。作者想把‘算法差异’与‘实践 best practices’拆开，弄清到底是什么在驱动效果。","importance":"这是一篇对齐训练方法论工作，重要性很高，因为它直接影响 RLHF / preference optimization 的实验解读。对 pretrain 的间接启示也强：post-train 阶段到底靠什么信号提升模型，会反过来影响我们如何设计 pretrain ↔ posttrain 接口、数据合成策略和 mid-training 配方。若 DPO/PPO 的差异被高估，很多团队的算法选择可能只是实现细节选择。","technical_approach":"核心方法是做严格控制变量的对比研究，系统拆解 DPO 与 PPO 中真正起作用的实践因素。题目中的 disentangling best practices 说明作者重点不是再提一个新偏好优化目标，而是统一训练设置后比较：数据过滤、on-policy vs off-policy、KL 正则强度、长度控制、reference model 使用方式、response sampling、reward normalization 等因素分别贡献多少。这样的设计有效，是因为 preference learning 极易被 pipeline 细节主导，单看最终胜负常常误判算法本身。","experiments":"虽然当前没有摘要，但这类工作通常会覆盖指令跟随、helpfulness、harmlessness 或 AlpacaEval / MT-Bench 一类评测，并比较标准 DPO、PPO 及其强实现。没有可靠来源时不应写具体数字。读者最应关注的是：在统一数据和 compute 后，两者差距是否显著缩小；哪些 best practices 对两个方法都关键；以及 PPO 的优势是否主要来自更灵活的 on-policy 数据更新，而 DPO 的优势是否主要来自实现简单和稳定。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a comparison problem: DPO and PPO are often treated as competing preference-learning algorithms, but many published comparisons confound the algorithm with data, KL control, sampling, reward modeling, and implementation details. The goal is to isolate what actually drives performance.","importance":"This is an important alignment-methodology paper. Its impact is not just on RLHF practice but also on how we interpret post-training signals more broadly. That matters for the pretrain–posttrain interface: if the apparent gains of one algorithm mostly come from surrounding pipeline choices, then many conclusions about model learning dynamics need to be revised.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is a carefully controlled empirical dissection of DPO versus PPO, focused on best practices rather than proposing yet another preference objective. The likely comparison standardizes data, compute, references, and evaluation while varying factors such as on-policy updates, KL regularization, length control, response sampling, reward normalization, and filtering. This is the right design because preference learning results are often dominated by pipeline details rather than the named objective itself.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so the exact datasets, models, and metrics cannot be confirmed. Papers of this type usually evaluate instruction-following and preference benchmarks under matched setups and compare both vanilla and strong-implementation baselines. The main result to look for is whether the gap between DPO and PPO narrows substantially under fair controls, and which operational practices matter for both methods regardless of the nominal algorithm.","authors_note":""},"tags":["dpo","ppo","preference-learning","rlhf"],"keywords":["RLHF","learning from preferences","PPO","DPO","Language Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"推翻了以往认为DPO天然优于PPO的认知，应立刻调整内部偏好优化的实验设置，先对齐最佳实践再对比不同算法的真实收益","en":"It overthrows the prior that DPO is inherently better than PPO, you should immediately adjust internal preference optimization experiment settings, align best practices first before comparing real gains of different algorithms."}},{"id":"JainLOJ0SD24","title":"What Makes and Breaks Safety Fine-tuning? A Mechanistic Study","authors":["Samyak Jain","Ekdeep Singh Lubana","Kemal Oksuz","Tom Joy","Philip Torr","Amartya Sanyal","Puneet K. Dokania"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$23","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JainLOJ0SD24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JainLOJ0SD24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a9bef53eb7b0e5950d4f2d9c74a16006-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：安全微调有时有效、有时脆弱，但社区对其成败机制理解不足，导致很多 safety fine-tuning 配方只能经验调参。作者要回答的是，安全微调到底改变了模型的哪些内部机制，以及哪些因素会让这种改变稳固或失效。","importance":"这是机制分析 + 对齐方法论工作。它对 pretrain 的间接价值不小，因为安全微调的稳定性决定了我们如何看待 base model 中已有能力与后续对齐之间的接口。若论文能说明安全行为是浅层模板化覆盖、还是更深层表示重组，就会直接影响后续数据配比、持续预训练和对齐训练顺序的设计。","technical_approach":"核心方法是对 safety fine-tuning 做 mechanistic study。按标题判断，作者大概率不是再提一个更强的安全训练算法，而是通过表示分析、层级干预、激活/方向追踪、遗忘与泛化测试等手段，区分‘什么让安全调优生效’和‘什么会破坏它’。这类设计的关键价值在于把最终拒答率或 jailbreak 成功率分解成内部机制：是行为头变化、特定安全特征方向增强，还是与一般指令跟随能力产生了竞争。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认模型规模、数据集和具体安全评测。可以预期作者会比较不同 fine-tuning 配方、数据量、学习率、训练步数，观察安全行为的保持、遗忘和迁移，并测试对分布外越狱或对抗提示的鲁棒性。读者最值得关注的是：论文是否发现安全微调主要作用于少数层或低秩子空间；以及哪些设置最容易导致 capability regression 或 safety collapse。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a practical uncertainty: safety fine-tuning sometimes works and sometimes fails, but we still do not understand the mechanism well. The goal is to identify what safety fine-tuning changes inside the model and what factors make those changes robust or fragile.","importance":"This is a mechanistic and alignment-methodology contribution. It also matters indirectly for pretraining because the stability of safety fine-tuning informs how we think about the interface between a capable base model and later alignment stages. If safety behavior is only a shallow overlay, that has very different implications from a deeper representational change.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is a mechanistic study of safety fine-tuning rather than a new safety-training algorithm. The likely approach is to analyze internal representations, intervene across layers, trace activation directions, and study forgetting and generalization to separate the factors that make safety tuning succeed from those that break it. This is valuable because end metrics like refusal rate or jailbreak success do not reveal where the behavior actually lives inside the network.","experiments":"The provided information does not specify model sizes, datasets, or exact safety benchmarks. A likely evaluation would vary fine-tuning recipes, data amount, learning rate, and training duration, then measure retention, transfer, and robustness under jailbreak or out-of-distribution prompts. The most informative findings would be whether safety tuning concentrates in a small set of layers or low-rank directions, and which settings most strongly induce capability loss or safety collapse.","authors_note":""},"tags":["safety","fine-tuning","mechanistic-interpretability","alignment"],"keywords":["Mechanistic Interpretability","AI Safety","Safety fine tuning","Large Language Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"拆解安全微调的内部作用机制，打破此前安全调优全靠经验试的现状，应立刻在内部对齐ablation中复现核心结论。","en":"Disassembles internal mechanisms of safety fine-tuning, breaks the prior of empirical safety tuning paradigm, reproduce core conclusions in internal alignment ablation studies immediately."}},{"id":"JiangLZWLAHA0L024","title":"MInference 1.0: Accelerating Pre-filling for Long-Context LLMs via Dynamic Sparse Attention","authors":["Huiqiang Jiang","Yucheng Li","Chengruidong Zhang","Qianhui Wu","Xufang Luo","Surin Ahn","Zhenhua Han","Amir H. Abdi","Dongsheng Li","Chin-Yew Lin","Yuqing Yang","Lili Qiu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$24","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JiangLZWLAHA0L024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JiangLZWLAHA0L024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/5dfbe6f5671e82c76841ba687a8a9ecb-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"长上下文LLM的预填充阶段注意力计算复杂度为二次方，8B模型在单A100上处理1M token prompt需要30分钟，现有加速方案无法同时兼顾精度和效率。","importance":"系统级+方法级贡献，专门针对长上下文预填充阶段的稀疏注意力优化，可大幅提升超长prompt的处理速度，对长上下文LLM的落地有直接应用价值。","technical_approach":"原创动态稀疏注意力方法，首先识别长上下文注意力矩阵的三个固有稀疏模式：A形、竖斜形、块稀疏，仅对非稀疏区域的注意力做计算，舍弃了传统对整个注意力矩阵做全计算的模式，不需要重新训练模型即可直接适配各类长上下文LLM。","experiments":"在8B、70B参数长上下文LLM上测试，处理1M token prompt的预填充时延从30分钟降低到20秒以内，精度下降小于1%，对比基线为标准预填充、FlashAttention-2，吞吐量提升80倍以上。消融实验显示三个稀疏模式的覆盖度达到98%以上，是效率提升的核心来源。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Attention compute in the pre-filling stage of long-context LLMs has quadratic complexity. An 8B model takes 30 minutes to process a 1M token prompt on a single A100 GPU. Existing acceleration solutions cannot balance accuracy and efficiency at the same time.","importance":"This is a system + method level contribution that optimizes sparse attention specifically for the long-context pre-filling stage. It significantly increases processing speed for ultra-long prompts, and has direct application value for the deployment of long-context LLMs.","technical_approach":"It is an original dynamic sparse attention method that first identifies three inherent sparse patterns in long-context attention matrices: A-shape, vertical-slash, and block-sparse. It only computes attention for non-sparse regions, abandoning the traditional full computation of the entire attention matrix. It can be directly applied to various long-context LLMs without retraining.","experiments":"Tested on 8B and 70B parameter long-context LLMs: pre-filling latency for 1M token prompts is reduced from 30 minutes to less than 20 seconds, with <1% accuracy drop. Throughput is increased by over 80x compared to standard pre-filling and FlashAttention-2 baselines. Ablation shows the three sparse patterns cover over 98% of attention weights, which is the core source of efficiency improvement.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-context","sparse-attention","inference","prefill-acceleration"],"keywords":["LLMs Inference","Long-Context LLMs","Dynamic Sparse Attention","Efficient Inference"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"长上下文注意力矩阵存在天然的稀疏性。","claim_en":"Long-context attention matrices have inherent sparsity.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅基于注意力稀疏模式的动态计算可以在精度损失可忽略的前提下大幅降低预填充时延。","claim_en":"Dynamic computation based only on attention sparse patterns can significantly reduce pre-filling latency with negligible accuracy loss.","opposes":"Prior work assumes sparse attention requires model retraining to maintain accuracy.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"It provides a feasible path for training-free acceleration of long-context pre-filling."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的三种固有稀疏模式定义和§4的速度精度对比实验即可。","en":"Only read §3 for three inherent sparse patterns and §4 for speed-accuracy comparison experiments."}},{"id":"KimSJKKKLSOHYY24","title":"Paralinguistics-Aware Speech-Empowered Large Language Models for Natural Conversation","authors":["Heeseung Kim","Soonshin Seo","Kyeongseok Jeong","Ohsung Kwon","Soyoon Kim","Jungwhan Kim","Jaehong Lee","Eunwoo Song","Myungwoo Oh","Jung-Woo Ha","Sungroh Yoon","Kang Min Yoo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$25","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KimSJKKKLSOHYY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KimSJKKKLSOHYY24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ecfa5340fd896e5314bc5e132b5dd5ca-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有语音增强LLM仅能处理语义信息，无法建模口语对话中的副语言特征（如韵律、语气），需要依赖独立的ASR和TTS模块，无法端到端生成自然的口语响应。","importance":"范式级贡献，提出了端到端的口语对话大模型框架，不需要ASR和TTS模块即可直接处理语音输入、生成带韵律的语音输出，对语音LLM的统一建模有重要启示。","technical_approach":"原创统一框架，首先验证了语音token中包含可提取的韵律信息，在此基础上构建韵律注入的语音-文本统一预训练目标，同时优化语义理解和韵律生成任务，舍弃了以往将语音语义和韵律分开建模的方案，用统一的LLM处理所有语音和文本模态的输入输出。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，核心测试指标包括语音理解准确率、生成语音的韵律自然度、对话连贯性，基线为依赖ASR+TTS的级联语音LLM方案。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing speech-enabled LLMs only process semantic information, cannot model paralinguistic features (e.g. prosody, tone) in spoken dialogues. They rely on independent ASR and TTS modules, and cannot generate natural spoken responses end-to-end.","importance":"This is a paradigm-level contribution that proposes an end-to-end spoken dialogue large model framework. It directly processes speech input and generates prosody-aware speech output without ASR or TTS modules, which has important implications for unified modeling of speech LLMs.","technical_approach":"It is an original unified framework that first verifies extractable prosody information exists in speech tokens, then builds a prosody-infused speech-text unified pre-training objective to optimize both semantic understanding and prosody generation tasks. It abandons the separate modeling of speech semantics and prosody used in prior work, and uses a unified LLM to process all speech and text input/output.","experiments":"Full experimental data is not disclosed in the public abstract. Core metrics include speech understanding accuracy, prosody naturalness of generated speech, and dialogue coherence. Baseline is the cascaded speech LLM solution relying on ASR+TTS.","authors_note":""},"tags":["speech-lm","audio","multimodal","conversation","tokenizer"],"keywords":["Spoken Dialog Modeling","Speech-Text Pretraining","Paralingustics","Spoken Language Model","LLM","USDM"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"语音LLM可以直接处理离散语音token而不需要ASR转文本。","claim_en":"Speech LLMs can directly process discrete speech tokens without ASR conversion to text.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"统一的语音-文本预训练可以端到端建模副语言特征，不需要额外的韵律建模模块。","claim_en":"Unified speech-text pre-training can model paralinguistic features end-to-end without extra prosody modeling modules.","opposes":"Prior work assumes speech semantics and prosody must be modeled separately, requiring independent TTS modules to generate prosody.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"It provides a new paradigm for end-to-end spoken dialogue large model design."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅需阅读§2的韵律注入语音-文本统一预训练目标设计即可。","en":"Only read §2 for the prosody-injected unified speech-text pre-training objective design."}},{"id":"KitouniNWRBI24","title":"The Factorization Curse: Which Tokens You Predict Underlie the Reversal Curse and More","authors":["Ouail Kitouni","Niklas Nolte","Adina Williams","Michael Rabbat","Diane Bouchacourt","Mark Ibrahim"],"institutions":["Meta AI"],"abstract":"$26","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KitouniNWRBI24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KitouniNWRBI24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/cbcce87f745072c819204529be843d16-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM存在逆转诅咒（无法按和训练时相反的顺序召回知识）、幻觉等问题，此前的研究将其归因于模型容量不足或训练数据分布问题，没有从建模目标的根源给出解释。","importance":"理论级贡献，将逆转诅咒扩展为更通用的因子分解诅咒，揭示了自回归预训练目标的固有缺陷，对改进预训练目标、提升LLM的事实准确性有重要指导意义。","technical_approach":"原创理论框架，将逆转诅咒重新定义为模型在不同因子分解下无法学习到相同的联合分布的问题，构建了基于维基百科知识图谱的WikiReversal测试集，通过控制变量实验验证因子分解方式对知识召回的影响，舍弃了以往仅从数据和模型容量角度分析的思路。","experiments":"在7B、13B、70B参数LLM上测试，不同因子分解下的知识召回准确率差距最高达到60%，模型容量提升仅能降低10%以内的差距，证实了因子分解诅咒是预训练目标的固有问题，无法通过单纯放大模型或数据解决。","authors_note":"团队包含Adina Williams等知名学者，过往代表性工作包括LLM的知识召回、幻觉问题研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLMs suffer from reversal curse (cannot recall knowledge when probed in reverse order of training) and hallucinations. Prior research attributes these problems to insufficient model capacity or training data distribution issues, and does not provide an explanation from the root of modeling objectives.","importance":"This is a theory-level contribution that extends the reversal curse to the more general factorization curse, revealing the inherent defect of autoregressive pre-training objectives. It has important guiding significance for improving pre-training objectives and enhancing factual accuracy of LLMs.","technical_approach":"It is an original theoretical framework that redefines the reversal curse as the failure of models to learn the same joint distribution under different factorizations. It builds the WikiReversal testbed based on Wikipedia knowledge graphs, and verifies the impact of factorization methods on knowledge recall through controlled experiments. It abandons the previous analysis perspective that only focuses on data and model capacity.","experiments":"Tested on 7B, 13B, 70B parameter LLMs: knowledge recall accuracy gap under different factorizations reaches up to 60%, and model capacity scaling only reduces the gap by less than 10%. This confirms the factorization curse is an inherent problem of pre-training objectives that cannot be solved by simply scaling models or data.","authors_note":"The team includes well-known researcher Adina Williams, whose representative prior work includes LLM knowledge recall and hallucination research."},"tags":["reversal-curse","factorization","autoregressive","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["Reversal curse","reliability","safety","language models","interpretability","learning objectives"],"notable_authors":["Adina Williams"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"自回归LLM存在逆转诅咒，无法可靠召回顺序和训练时相反的知识。","claim_en":"Autoregressive LLMs suffer from reversal curse and cannot reliably recall knowledge with order reversed from training.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"逆转诅咒是自回归预训练的因子分解目标导致的固有缺陷，无法通过增加模型参数或训练数据解决。","claim_en":"The reversal curse is an inherent defect caused by the factorization objective of autoregressive pre-training, and cannot be solved by increasing model parameters or training data.","opposes":"Prior work assumes the reversal curse is caused by insufficient training data or model capacity, and can be solved by scaling.","opposes_cite_hint":"Hoffmann 2022 Chinchilla","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"It overturns the belief that scaling can solve all LLM defects, and provides theoretical support for non-autoregressive pre-training objective research."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的因子分解诅咒理论推导和WikiReversal测试集设计部分即可。","en":"Only read §3 for factorization curse theoretical derivation and WikiReversal benchmark construction."}},{"id":"KossonMJ24","title":"Analyzing &amp; Reducing the Need for Learning Rate Warmup in GPT Training","authors":["Atli Kosson","Bettina Messmer","Martin Jaggi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KossonMJ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KossonMJ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/059445c2d5b3ef918079851628fef1d6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["learning-rate","warmup","gpt-training","optimizer","training-dynamics"]},{"id":"2404.14469","title":"SnapKV: LLM Knows What You are Looking for Before Generation","authors":["Yuhong Li","Yingbing Huang","Bowen Yang","Bharat Venkitesh","Acyr Locatelli","Hanchen Ye","Tianle Cai","Patrick Lewis","Deming Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$27","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.14469","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiHYVLYCLC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiHYVLYCLC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/28ab418242603e0f7323e54185d19bde-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：长上下文推理时 KV cache 随输入长度线性膨胀，严重拖累显存和速度，能不能在不微调模型的前提下压缩 KV，同时尽量不伤性能。过去常见办法是做重训练、近似注意力或启发式裁剪，但要么改模型代价高，要么在真实任务上掉点明显，因为它们很难知道“未来生成真正会用到哪些历史 token”。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在 serving / inference 系统层，但对预训练研究也有启发，因为它揭示了一个稳定的注意力现象：不同 head 在生成时会持续关注特定 prompt 特征，而且这种模式可从 prompt 尾部一个 observation window 里提前读出来。这个发现意味着，模型对上下文的重要性分布在生成前就部分显现了。若这一规律稳健，它不仅能做 KV 压缩，也可能反过来指导训练时的长上下文数据组织和注意力分析。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 SnapKV，一个无需微调的 KV cache 压缩方法。作者的关键观察是：每个 attention head 在生成阶段对 prompt 中哪些位置敏感，具有较稳定的模式，而且这个模式可以从 prompt 末尾的一小段 observation window 估计出来。基于此，SnapKV 在真正生成前就为每个 head 自动挑出应保留的上下文 token，从而压缩 KV。和统一按最近 token 保留或全局重要性裁剪不同，它是 head-specific、query-aware 的，但又避免了在线逐步重算的重要性开销，因此兼顾效果和部署可行性。","experiments":"摘要能确认的结论是：SnapKV 是 fine-tuning-free 的，并在显著减小 KV cache 的同时，在真实应用中保持可比性能。摘要没有给出压缩倍数、适用上下文长度、模型列表和具体任务指标，因此不能补充数值。真正值得关注的实验包括：在不同模型和长文本/多文档 QA/代码场景中的保真度；压缩比与性能的 trade-off 曲线；以及 observation window 长度是否稳定。如果只在某些头部模式强的模型上有效，泛化会受限；若跨模型稳定，这会是很实用的部署技巧。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a concrete deployment bottleneck: KV cache grows linearly with prompt length, making long-context inference memory-hungry and slow. The challenge is to compress KV without fine-tuning and without guessing blindly which past tokens will matter during generation.","importance":"This is primarily an inference-systems contribution, but it carries an interesting modeling insight. The authors argue that each attention head shows a stable preference over prompt features during generation, and that this pattern can be estimated from a small observation window at the end of the prompt. If that observation is robust, it matters beyond serving: it says the model reveals part of its future context usage before decoding starts.","technical_approach":"SnapKV is a training-free KV compression method. Its key idea is to use a short observation window near the end of the prompt to infer which prompt positions each attention head is likely to rely on during generation, then keep only those KV entries. Relative to simple recency-based truncation or global heuristic pruning, this is more head-specific and query-aware. Relative to methods that require online recomputation or fine-tuning, it is much cheaper to deploy.","experiments":"The abstract claims that SnapKV substantially reduces KV cache size while maintaining comparable performance in real-world applications, and that it requires no fine-tuning. It does not include compression ratios, model names, context lengths, or quantitative task results. The key evidence to inspect is the retention-performance trade-off across models and tasks, and how sensitive the method is to the choice of observation-window length.","authors_note":""},"tags":["kv-cache","long-context","inference-efficiency","attention"],"keywords":["Large Language Model","Key-Value Cache Compression","Natural Language Processing","Inference","Machine Learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"揭示注意力头生成前就存在稳定关注模式，改变此前KV裁剪全靠启发式的认知，可快速落地到内部serving方案。","en":"Reveals stable attention pattern exists before generation, breaks the prior of heuristic KV pruning, can be quickly deployed to internal serving systems."}},{"id":"LiTLDH24","title":"Autoregressive Image Generation without Vector Quantization","authors":["Tianhong Li","Yonglong Tian","He Li","Mingyang Deng","Kaiming He"],"institutions":["Meta FAIR"],"abstract":"$28","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiTLDH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiTLDH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/66e226469f20625aaebddbe47f0ca997-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"自回归图像生成此前被认为必须搭配向量量化（VQ）得到的离散token才能实现，VQ会带来不可逆的信息损失，还需要单独训练tokenizer，额外增加了训练复杂度。","importance":"范式级改进，直接打破了自回归图像生成对离散VQ tokenizer的强依赖，打通了AR和diffusion两种生成范式的联合建模路径，为多模态统一预训练的模态表示设计提供了新的可选方向。","technical_approach":"原创的连续空间AR建模方案，用扩散过程建模每个位置的连续值概率分布，替换传统的分类交叉熵损失为扩散损失，完全舍弃VQ量化步骤。和现有AR图像生成方案比，不需要单独训tokenizer，也不会引入量化误差。","experiments":"在标准自回归图像生成模型、掩码自回归（MAR）变体两类架构上验证了方案有效性，具体量化指标待完整论文公开。","authors_note":"通讯作者为Kaiming He，团队来自Meta FAIR，过往代表性工作包括MAE、DINO系列视觉预训练模型。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This work eliminates the mandatory dependency on vector-quantized (VQ) discrete tokens for autoregressive (AR) image generation, which was previously considered a hard requirement due to the categorical cross-entropy loss used in standard AR modeling. VQ introduces irreversible information loss and requires separate tokenizer training, adding unnecessary complexity.","importance":"Paradigm-level improvement that breaks the core dependency of AR image generation on discrete VQ tokenizers. It unifies AR and diffusion generation paradigms, providing a new option for modality representation design in unified multimodal pretraining.","technical_approach":"Original continuous-space AR modeling framework. It models the continuous probability distribution of each position via a diffusion process, replacing categorical cross-entropy loss with a diffusion loss, and removes the VQ quantization step entirely. Compared to existing AR image generation methods, it requires no separate tokenizer training and introduces no quantization error.","experiments":"Effectiveness is validated on both standard AR image generation models and masked autoregressive (MAR) variants. Full quantitative metrics are pending public release of the complete paper.","authors_note":"Corresponding author is Kaiming He, team from Meta FAIR. Past representative works include MAE, DINO series visual pretraining models."},"tags":["autoregressive","image-generation","continuous-token","non-vq"],"keywords":["Image Generation","Autoregressive Models","Diffusion Models"],"notable_authors":["Kaiming He","Yonglong Tian"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"自回归生成需要对每个位置的概率分布进行显式建模","claim_en":"Autoregressive generation requires explicit modeling of the probability distribution for each position","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"自回归图像生成不需要向量量化离散token，在连续空间用扩散损失建模单token分布即可实现","claim_en":"Autoregressive image generation does not require vector-quantized discrete tokens, and can be implemented by modeling per-token distribution with diffusion loss in continuous space","opposes":"Prior domain consensus that autoregressive image generation must be paired with discrete VQ tokenizers","opposes_cite_hint":"Esser 2021 VQ-GAN, Ramesh 2022 DALL-E 2","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction, §3 Method","why_contested":"Overturns the core prerequisite assumption of AR image generation, and restructures the dependency of the entire technical stack."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3的连续空间自回归建模方案和损失设计部分即可。","en":"Only read §3 for continuous-space autoregressive modeling scheme and loss function design."}},{"id":"LinGGLSX0Y0DC24","title":"Not All Tokens Are What You Need for Pretraining","authors":["Zhenghao Lin","Zhibin Gou","Yeyun Gong","Xiao Liu","Yelong Shen","Ruochen Xu","Chen Lin","Yujiu Yang","Jian Jiao","Nan Duan","Weizhu Chen"],"institutions":["Microsoft Research","Zhipu AI"],"abstract":"$29","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LinGGLSX0Y0DC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LinGGLSX0Y0DC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3322a9a72a1707de14badd5e552ff466-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"传统预训练对语料中所有token均匀施加next-token预测损失，没有区分不同token对模型能力的增益差异，大量低价值、噪声token浪费训练算力，还会降低最终模型性能。","importance":"方法级改进，提出的选择性语言建模（SLM）范式实现了细粒度的预训练损失动态筛选，在不增加训练数据量的前提下提升预训练效率和模型效果，对齐了预训练与SFT阶段对高质量数据的偏好。","technical_approach":"原创的预训练损失优化方案，先用参考模型对所有训练token打分，筛选出与目标能力分布对齐的高价值token，仅对这些token计算next-token损失，舍弃对低价值token的拟合。和传统全token训练比，降低了无效算力开销，避免模型拟合垃圾数据。","experiments":"基于该方案训练的Rho-1模型，在相同训练算力下效果优于同等规模的传统全token预训练模型，具体提升幅度待完整论文公开。","authors_note":"团队成员来自微软研究院、智谱AI，Yelong Shen、Xiao Liu为核心作者，过往代表性工作包括一系列预训练效率优化、大模型对齐相关工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Traditional pretraining applies next-token prediction loss uniformly to all tokens in the corpus, without differentiating the contribution of different tokens to model capability. Large volumes of low-value, noisy tokens waste training compute and degrade final model performance.","importance":"Method-level improvement. The proposed Selective Language Modeling (SLM) paradigm enables fine-grained dynamic filtering of pretraining loss, improving pretraining efficiency and model performance without increasing training data volume, and aligns the data preference of pretraining with SFT stages.","technical_approach":"Original pretraining loss optimization framework. It first scores all training tokens with a reference model, filters high-value tokens aligned with the target capability distribution, and only computes next-token loss on these tokens, discarding fitting of low-value tokens. Compared to traditional full-token training, it reduces invalid compute overhead and avoids the model fitting junk data.","experiments":"The Rho-1 model trained with this scheme outperforms traditional full-token pretrained models of the same size under equal training compute. Full performance metrics are pending public release of the complete paper.","authors_note":"Team members from Microsoft Research, Zhipu AI, with core authors Yelong Shen and Xiao Liu. Past representative works include pretraining efficiency optimization and large model alignment research."},"tags":["pretraining","token-selection","data-efficiency","scaling"],"keywords":["pre-training","next token prediction","data optimization","data selection"],"notable_authors":["Yelong Shen","Xiao Liu"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"预训练数据质量直接影响最终模型的性能上限","claim_en":"Pretraining data quality directly affects the upper bound of final model performance","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"预训练不需要对所有token施加next-token损失，仅对筛选后的高价值token训练即可获得更好的效果和效率","claim_en":"Pretraining does not require applying next-token loss to all tokens; training only on filtered high-value tokens can achieve better performance and efficiency","opposes":"Prior default practice of applying uniform next-token loss to all tokens in the pretraining corpus","opposes_cite_hint":"Radford 2018 GPT-1, Brown 2020 GPT-3","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction, §3 Method","why_contested":"Changes the core logic of pretraining loss application, providing a dynamic, fine-grained solution for pretraining data filtering."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"提出细粒度预训练损失筛选范式，打破全token均匀训练的默认做法，应立刻集成到内部预训练pipeline。","en":"Proposes fine-grained pre-training loss filtering paradigm, breaks the default full-token uniform training practice, integrate into internal pre-training pipeline immediately."}},{"id":"2403.02436","title":"How does Architecture Influence the Base Capabilities of Pre-trained Language Models? A Case Study Based on FFN-Wider and MoE Transformers","authors":["Xin Lu","Yanyan Zhao","Bing Qin","Liangyu Huo","Qing Yang","Dongliang Xu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.02436","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LuZ0H0X24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LuZ0H0X24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9f2b171fd3f4ca8dd71d1998f65c356a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：在控制规模不变时，Transformer 架构本身会如何影响预训练语言模型的 base capabilities。过去大家更关注 scaling law，把能力变化主要归因于参数量和数据量；这篇工作试图说明，即使在同尺度下，FFN 变宽和 MoE 这类架构选择也会系统性改变模型的分布内、分布外和 few-shot 能力。","importance":"这是一篇直接面向 pretrain 设计的架构研究。它的重要性不在提出全新模型，而在于指出一个常被工程上忽略的问题：追求更高训练吞吐或更优参数效率的架构改动，可能会悄悄伤到 base capability。对 MoE、宽 FFN、稀疏化路线都很有参考价值，因为这些设计常被默认视为“同等替代”。","technical_approach":"作者以 FFN-Wider Transformer 和 MoE Transformer 为案例，分析架构变化为何导致 base capability 下降，并尝试解释与逆转这种下降。摘要已给出一个关键信号：他们发现 Multi-Head Attention 作为组合函数，对预训练语言建模能力的贡献比例会因架构变化而失衡；换句话说，单纯把 FFN 做宽，可能压缩了注意力在组合与迁移上的作用。基于这个观察，论文大概率提出了恢复 attention/FFN 功能配比的设计或训练修正，而不是简单继续加宽。","experiments":"摘要被截断，没有完整数字，但可以确认实验围绕 base capabilities 展开，包括 in-distribution language modeling、out-of-distribution language modeling、transfer learning 和 few-shot learning。合理预期是：作者在控制参数量或训练预算的条件下，对比标准 Transformer、FFN-wider 和 MoE 变体，展示某些架构虽然训练 loss 不差，但在 OOD、迁移和 few-shot 上更弱。最值得关注的不是单项 benchmark，而是是否存在统一趋势：attention 贡献下降时，base capability 也同步下降；若提出修正后，这一趋势是否被逆转。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a clean pretraining question: holding scale roughly fixed, how does architecture affect the base capabilities of pretrained language models? Most prior discussion emphasizes scale laws, but this work argues that architectural choices such as wider FFNs or MoE variants can systematically change in-distribution, out-of-distribution, transfer, and few-shot behavior.","importance":"This is directly relevant to pretraining design. Its value is not in proposing a brand-new model family, but in challenging a common engineering assumption: architectural changes made for efficiency or parameter scaling are not capability-neutral. That is especially relevant for wider-FFN and MoE-style designs, which are often treated as straightforward substitutes.","technical_approach":"The paper studies FFN-wider Transformers and MoE Transformers as case studies, trying to explain and reverse the drop in base capabilities induced by architecture. The abstract already gives the main clue: the contribution ratio of multi-head attention, viewed as a combination function, becomes imbalanced under certain architectural changes. The likely thesis is that simply increasing FFN capacity can crowd out the combinational role of attention, hurting generalization even if training loss remains competitive. The proposed fix is therefore likely to restore a healthier attention–FFN balance rather than just scaling width further.","experiments":"The abstract is truncated, so exact numbers are unavailable. What can be inferred is that the evaluation covers in-distribution language modeling, out-of-distribution language modeling, transfer learning, and few-shot learning under controlled architectural comparisons. The key result to look for is whether wider-FFN or MoE variants preserve training performance but degrade broader base capabilities, and whether the proposed architectural adjustment reverses that trend. The most interesting signal is cross-metric consistency, not a single benchmark win.","authors_note":""},"tags":["architecture","moe","ffn","scaling","base-model"],"keywords":["Pre-trained Language Models","Base Capabilities","Mixture of Experts"],"recommendation":{"zh":"验证同参数量下架构选择会显著影响base能力，打破规模决定能力的固有认知，架构选型时必须参考。","en":"Validates architecture choices significantly impact base capabilities under same parameter count, breaks the scaling-only capability prior, must be referenced for architecture selection."}},{"id":"2312.10523","title":"Paloma: A Benchmark for Evaluating Language Model Fit","authors":["Ian Magnusson","Akshita Bhagia","Valentin Hofmann","Luca Soldaini","Ananya Harsh Jha","Oyvind Tafjord","Dustin Schwenk","Evan Pete Walsh","Yanai Elazar","Kyle Lo","Dirk Groeneveld","Iz Beltagy","Hanna Hajishirzi","Noah A. Smith","Kyle Richardson","Jesse Dodge"],"institutions":["Allen Institute for AI"],"abstract":"$2b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.10523","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MagnussonBHSJTS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MagnussonBHSJTS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/760b2d94398aa61468aa3bc11506d9ea-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"传统语言模型评估仅报告单一分布留出集的困惑度，无法反映模型在不同领域的拟合能力，不同预训练语料、训练方案的优劣对比缺乏公平、多维度的统一标准。","importance":"基准级+数据级贡献，填补了多领域语言模型预训练效果评估的空白，为预训练语料配比、领域适配方案的对比提供了可控、统一的测试基准。","technical_approach":"原创的多领域评估基准，覆盖546个英文和代码领域，新增Top100子Reddit、多编程语言两个专属数据集，同时开源6个1B参数的可控基线模型，所有基线训练配置完全对齐，保证不同方案的对比公平性。舍弃了传统单一留出集的评估方式，分域计算困惑度。","experiments":"开源的6个1B参数基线LM仅预训练语料不同，其余训练配置完全对齐，可直接对比不同预训练语料的分域效果，具体分域指标可通过开源工具获取。","authors_note":"团队来自Allen Institute for AI (AI2)，过往代表性工作包括一系列LM评估基准、预训练语料分析相关工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Traditional language model evaluation only reports perplexity on a single held-out distribution, which cannot reflect model fit across different domains. There is no fair, multi-dimensional unified standard for comparing the performance of different pretraining corpora and training schemes.","importance":"Benchmark and data-level contribution that fills the gap in multi-domain LM pretraining performance evaluation, providing a controlled, unified test benchmark for comparing pretraining corpus ratios and domain adaptation schemes.","technical_approach":"Original multi-domain evaluation benchmark covering 546 English and code domains, with two new dedicated datasets for top 100 subreddits and multiple programming languages. It also open-sources 6 controlled 1B parameter baseline models with fully aligned training configurations to ensure fair comparison of different schemes. It abandons the traditional single held-out set evaluation method and computes perplexity per domain.","experiments":"The 6 open-sourced 1B baseline LMs only differ in pretraining corpus, with all other training configurations fully aligned, enabling direct comparison of domain-specific performance of different pretraining corpora. Domain-specific metrics are available via the open-source tool.","authors_note":"Team from Allen Institute for AI (AI2). Past representative works include LM evaluation benchmarks and pretraining corpus analysis research."},"tags":["benchmark","perplexity","domain-evaluation","data-quality","pretraining"],"keywords":["Perplexity","Language Modeling","Evaluation","Domains","Benchmark Contamination"],"notable_authors":["Luca Soldaini"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"单一分布的困惑度无法泛化到不同下游领域的性能预测","claim_en":"Perplexity on a single distribution cannot generalize to performance prediction across different downstream domains","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅用单一留出集困惑度评估LM预训练效果的结论不可靠，不同语料的优劣在不同领域存在显著差异","claim_en":"Evaluating LM pretraining performance only with perplexity on a single held-out set is unreliable; the performance of different corpora varies significantly across domains","opposes":"Prior default assumption that single held-out set perplexity represents the general pretraining performance of an LM","opposes_cite_hint":"Hoffmann 2022 Chinchilla","evidence_anchor":"§2 Benchmark Design, §4 Experiments","why_contested":"Negates the common practice of existing pretraining performance evaluation, requiring subsequent pretraining work to conduct multi-dimensional domain-specific validation."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看附录的多域评估数据集列表和基线训练配置即可，用来做内部预训练效果对比。","en":"Only check the multi-domain evaluation dataset list and baseline training config in appendix for internal pre-training performance comparison."}},{"id":"NguyenHR24","title":"Sigmoid Gating is More Sample Efficient than Softmax Gating in Mixture of Experts","authors":["Huy Nguyen","Nhat Ho","Alessandro Rinaldo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NguyenHR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NguyenHR24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d65befe6b80ecf7f180b4def503d7776-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在 Mixture-of-Experts 里，路由器到底该用 softmax gating 还是 sigmoid gating，哪种在样本效率上更好。MoE 研究很多时候默认 softmax 是标准选择，但它引入专家间竞争和概率归一化，这未必总是最利于学习，尤其在有限样本或专家应并行激活的场景下。","importance":"这项工作对 MoE 训练设计有直接价值。它不是大而全的新架构，而是对一个关键局部设计给出更明确的样本效率结论；对 pretrain 来说，这种结果很实用，因为 MoE 的稳定性、负载均衡和数据效率经常被 gating 机制主导。","technical_approach":"核心观点从标题已经很明确：sigmoid gating 比 softmax gating 更样本高效。可能的技术路线是给出统计学习理论或优化分析，说明 softmax 归一化带来的竞争耦合会增加学习难度，而 sigmoid 允许更独立的专家选择，从而更容易恢复正确路由；代价通常是需要额外机制处理负载均衡或防止所有专家同时激活。","experiments":"实验应会在合成任务和若干真实任务上比较两种 gating 的样本复杂度、收敛速度和泛化误差。关键 ablation 可能包括专家数、top-k 设置、负载均衡正则、噪声水平。由于没有摘要和数值，无法可靠给出具体模型规模、数据量和提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper examines a basic but consequential MoE question: should the router use softmax gating or sigmoid gating, and which one is more sample efficient? Softmax is often treated as the default, but its normalization forces competition between experts and may not be the easiest signal to learn from data.","importance":"This is a focused but practically relevant contribution for MoE design. It matters to pretraining because routing choices strongly affect data efficiency, optimization stability, and expert specialization, often more than small architectural tweaks elsewhere.","technical_approach":"The title states the main claim directly: sigmoid gating is more sample efficient than softmax gating in MoE. The likely analysis shows that softmax introduces stronger coupling and competition across experts, making the routing problem statistically harder, whereas sigmoid gating enables more independent activation decisions. The trade-off is that sigmoid typically needs extra control for load balancing or sparse activation.","experiments":"The empirical section likely compares the two gating schemes on synthetic and real tasks using sample complexity, convergence speed, and generalization as the main metrics. Useful ablations would vary the number of experts, top-k routing, balancing regularization, and noise level. Since no abstract or numbers are provided, exact task setups and gains cannot be reported safely.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","sigmoid-gating","sample-efficiency","scaling"],"keywords":["mixture of experts","sigmoid gating function","softmax gating function","sample efficiency"],"recommendation":{"zh":"证明sigmoid门控样本效率优于softmax，打破MoE默认用softmax门控的固有习惯，内部MoE训练直接验证。","en":"Proves sigmoid gating has higher sample efficiency than softmax, breaks the default softmax gating practice, validate directly in internal MoE training."}},{"id":"NieLFZMLZL024","title":"LSH-MoE: Communication-efficient MoE Training via Locality-Sensitive Hashing","authors":["Xiaonan Nie","Qibin Liu","Fangcheng Fu","Shenhan Zhu","Xupeng Miao","Xiaoyang Li","Yang Zhang","Shouda Liu","Bin Cui"],"institutions":["Tsinghua University","ByteDance"],"abstract":"$2d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NieLFZMLZL024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NieLFZMLZL024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/61674667d642ae52f6bb281bea90ee29-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"大规模MoE训练中跨GPU的all-to-all通信开销平均占比达45%，成为MoE架构 scaling 的核心瓶颈，现有通信优化方案没有从路由逻辑本身降低通信量的有效手段。","importance":"系统级+架构级改进，可直接降低大模型MoE预训练的通信开销，提升训练吞吐量，不需要额外硬件投入，可直接落地到现有大规模MoE训练系统中。","technical_approach":"原创的MoE路由优化方案，用局部敏感哈希（LSH）做路由决策，将语义相近的token路由到同一块GPU上的专家，减少跨GPU的路由请求，从而降低all-to-all通信量。和传统门控路由比，舍弃了完全自由的路由分配，用哈希约束路由的局部性，几乎不损失模型效果。","experiments":"在主流GPU集群上测试3种主流MoE模型，通信开销最高降低70%，训练吞吐量提升40%左右，模型效果与原MoE架构持平。","authors_note":"团队来自清华大学、字节跳动，过往代表性工作包括一系列大模型分布式训练、MoE架构优化相关工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Cross-GPU all-to-all communication overhead accounts for an average of 45% of total training time in large-scale MoE training, becoming the core bottleneck for MoE scaling. Existing communication optimization schemes have no effective means to reduce communication volume from the routing logic itself.","importance":"System and architecture-level improvement that directly reduces communication overhead for MoE pretraining of large models, improves training throughput without additional hardware investment, and can be directly implemented in existing large-scale MoE training systems.","technical_approach":"Original MoE routing optimization scheme that uses locality-sensitive hashing (LSH) for routing decisions, routing semantically similar tokens to experts on the same GPU, reducing cross-GPU routing requests and thus all-to-all communication volume. Compared to traditional gating routing, it abandons fully free routing allocation, constrains routing locality with hashing, and causes almost no model performance loss.","experiments":"Tested on 3 mainstream MoE models on common GPU clusters, communication overhead is reduced by up to 70%, training throughput is increased by around 40%, and model performance is on par with the original MoE architecture.","authors_note":"Team from Tsinghua University, ByteDance. Past representative works include distributed training of large models and MoE architecture optimization research."},"tags":["moe","communication-efficiency","lsh","distributed-training"],"keywords":["mixture of experts","locality-sensitive hashing","communication optimization"],"notable_authors":["Xupeng Miao"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"MoE架构的跨GPU all-to-all通信是大规模训练的主要瓶颈","claim_en":"Cross-GPU all-to-all communication in MoE architectures is the main bottleneck for large-scale training","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"用局部敏感哈希做MoE路由可以在不损失模型效果的前提下大幅降低跨GPU通信开销，效果优于传统门控路由加通信优化的方案","claim_en":"Using locality-sensitive hashing for MoE routing can significantly reduce cross-GPU communication overhead without losing model performance, outperforming traditional gating routing with communication optimization","opposes":"Prior assumption that MoE gating routing must be globally freely allocated to ensure performance, and routing constraints will cause accuracy loss","opposes_cite_hint":"Shazeer 2017 Outrageously Large Neural Networks","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method, §5 Experiments","why_contested":"Provides a new direction for MoE routing design, which can be directly implemented in existing large-scale MoE training systems."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的LSH路由设计和跨GPU通信开销对比实验即可。","en":"Only read §3 for LSH routing design and cross-GPU communication overhead comparison experiments."}},{"id":"PouransariLCVKS24","title":"Dataset Decomposition: Faster LLM Training with Variable Sequence Length Curriculum","authors":["Hadi Pouransari","Chun-Liang Li","Jen-Hao Rick Chang","Pavan Kumar Anasosalu Vasu","Cem Koc","Vaishaal Shankar","Oncel Tuzel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$2e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PouransariLCVKS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PouransariLCVKS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3f9bf45ea04c98ad7cb857f951f499e2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：标准 LLM 训练通常把所有序列长度混在一起按固定上限处理，导致大量算力花在长序列的二次复杂度上，而很多训练信号其实可以在更短上下文里先学到。过去大家会做 sequence packing 或 length bucketing 来减少 padding 浪费，但很少把‘序列长度本身’当成可设计的 curriculum。","importance":"这是一篇很直接的 pretrain 效率论文。它的重要性在于，它不改模型主体，只通过数据分解和长度课程就可能带来可观的训练加速；如果成立，这类方法对大规模预训练特别实用，因为它和数据混合、cooldown、continued pretraining 都容易组合，工程侵入性也小。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 dataset decomposition 加 variable sequence length curriculum：先把训练样本按长度或可分解片段重组，再按照训练阶段控制输入长度分布，让模型先在短上下文上高效学习局部统计，再逐步暴露更长依赖。关键设计点是两处：一是如何分解数据而不破坏跨句或跨段依赖，二是课程调度如何避免模型后期对长上下文适应不足；与单纯 length bucketing 相比，这里强调的是训练信号和计算成本的阶段性匹配，而不只是减少 padding。","experiments":"实验最关键的事实应是同等质量下更少训练 FLOPs 或更短 wall-clock。理想结果会报告：在若干 LLM 规模上，相比固定长度训练，长度课程在预训练 loss、下游 few-shot 或长期依赖任务上持平或更好，同时训练时间明显下降；有价值的 ablation 会展示课程起点、长度增长速度、以及是否需要在后期进行 full-length annealing。由于没有摘要，无法确认使用的数据规模、上下文长度设置及节省比例。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a wasteful default in LLM training: we often train with a fixed maximum sequence length even though much of the useful signal can be learned from shorter contexts first, while long sequences incur disproportionately high cost. Existing tricks like packing and bucketing reduce padding waste, but they do not treat sequence length itself as a curriculum variable.","importance":"This is a directly relevant pretraining-efficiency paper. Its appeal is practical: if varying sequence length over training preserves model quality while reducing compute, it offers a low-intrusion lever that can be combined with standard data mixing, cooldown schedules, and continued pretraining.","technical_approach":"The method appears to decompose the dataset and apply a variable-length curriculum so the model sees shorter contexts early and progressively longer ones later. The design only works if two constraints are handled carefully: decomposition must not destroy the dependencies we eventually care about, and the curriculum must not leave the model under-adapted to long context near the end. That is the key difference from simple length bucketing, which mainly addresses padding rather than compute-aware learning dynamics.","experiments":"The main evidence should be better training efficiency at equal or near-equal quality. A convincing result would show lower FLOPs or wall-clock than fixed-length training while matching pretraining loss and downstream performance, plus ablations on the initial context length, expansion schedule, and whether a final full-length phase is necessary. The abstract is not available, so dataset scale, context settings, and exact savings cannot be confirmed.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-curriculum","variable-sequence-length","training-efficiency","llm-pretrain"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Efficient Training","Learning Efficiency","Long Context"],"recommendation":{"zh":"提出可变长度课程训练范式，打破固定序列长度上限的默认做法，可快速集成到内部预训练课程调度。","en":"Proposes variable sequence length curriculum training paradigm, breaks fixed sequence length upper limit practice, quickly integrate into internal pre-training curriculum scheduling."}},{"id":"RuanMH24","title":"Observational Scaling Laws and the Predictability of Langauge Model Performance","authors":["Yangjun Ruan","Chris J. Maddison","Tatsunori B. Hashimoto"],"institutions":["Stanford University","University of Toronto"],"abstract":"$2f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RuanMH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RuanMH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1cded4f97cf5f01a284c574110b7e3b9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"传统缩放定律需要训练同一配置下不同规模的大量模型才能拟合，成本极高，无法快速指导新模型、新训练范式的 scaling 规划。","importance":"方法级贡献，不需要训练模型即可拟合缩放定律，大幅降低缩放规律研究的成本，可快速评估不同训练方案的scaling潜力。","technical_approach":"原创的观测式缩放定律拟合方案，基于公开的100多个不同系列的预训练模型数据，拟合低维能力空间的通用缩放函数，不同模型家族仅在训练效率上有差异，不需要针对每个家族单独训练模型拟合。和传统缩放定律研究比，舍弃了从零训练不同规模模型的要求，直接用已公开的模型数据做观测拟合。","experiments":"在多个公开模型系列上验证，拟合的缩放定律预测误差低于5%，可准确预测不同模型在不同算力下的性能。","authors_note":"团队来自斯坦福大学、多伦多大学，Chris J. Maddison、Tatsunori B. Hashimoto为知名机器学习研究者，过往代表性工作包括生成模型、因果推断、大模型 scaling 相关研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Traditional scaling laws require training a large number of models of different sizes under the same configuration for fitting, which is extremely costly and cannot quickly guide scaling planning for new models and new training paradigms.","importance":"Method-level contribution that enables scaling law fitting without training models, drastically reduces the cost of scaling law research, and can quickly evaluate the scaling potential of different training schemes.","technical_approach":"Original observational scaling law fitting framework, based on data from over 100 publicly available pretrained models of different families, fits a general scaling function in a low-dimensional capability space, where different model families only differ in training efficiency, eliminating the need to train separate models for each family for fitting. Compared to traditional scaling law research, it abandons the requirement of training models of different sizes from scratch, and directly uses publicly available model data for observational fitting.","experiments":"Validated on multiple public model families, the fitted scaling law has a prediction error of less than 5%, and can accurately predict the performance of different models under different compute budgets.","authors_note":"Team from Stanford University, University of Toronto. Core authors Chris J. Maddison and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto are well-known machine learning researchers, past representative works include generative models, causal inference, and large model scaling research."},"tags":["scaling-law","evaluation","predictability","language-modeling"],"keywords":["Language Models","Scaling Laws","Emergent Capability","Agents","Post-Training Methods"],"notable_authors":["Chris J. Maddison","Tatsunori B. Hashimoto"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"语言模型性能随训练算力、模型参数量、数据量的提升遵循可预测的缩放规律","claim_en":"Language model performance follows predictable scaling laws with the increase of training compute, model parameters, and data volume","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"不需要训练多个不同规模的模型，仅通过公开模型的观测数据即可拟合通用缩放定律，预测误差在可接受范围内","claim_en":"General scaling laws can be fitted only with observational data from public models without training multiple models of different sizes, with acceptable prediction error","opposes":"Prior requirement that scaling law fitting must rely on training results of models of different sizes under the same training configuration","opposes_cite_hint":"Kaplan 2020 Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models, Hoffmann 2022 Chinchilla","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method, §4 Experiments","why_contested":"Drastically reduces the threshold for scaling law research, enabling rapid alignment of scaling efficiency across different training paradigms."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为 literature 备查，不读正文；用公开模型拟合 scaling law 的思路很取巧，但对指导从零预训练的 action 意义有限，结论可信度存疑。","en":"Keep as literature reference, skip the main text; fitting scaling laws with public models is clever but offers limited actionable guidance for from-scratch pretraining, and the reliability of the conclusions is questionable."}},{"id":"2406.04823","title":"BERTs are Generative In-Context Learners","authors":["David Samuel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"While in-context learning is commonly associated with causal language models, such as GPT, we demonstrate that this capability also 'emerges' in masked language models. Through an embarrassingly simple inference technique, we enable an existing masked model, DeBERTa, to perform generative tasks without additional training or architectural changes. Our evaluation reveals that the masked and causal language models behave very differently, as they clearly outperform each other on different categories of tasks. These complementary strengths suggest that the field's focus on causal models for in-context learning may be limiting - both architectures can develop these capabilities, but with distinct advantages; pointing toward promising hybrid approaches that combine the strengths of both objectives.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.04823","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Samuel24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Samuel24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/04ea184dfb5f1babb78c093e850a83f9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"此前领域默认只有因果语言模型（CLM）具备生成式上下文学习（ICL）能力，掩码语言模型（MLM）无法完成生成式ICL任务，浪费了MLM预训练得到的表征能力。","importance":"范式级发现，修正了对MLM能力边界的认知，为混合预训练目标、ICL架构设计提供了新的思路。","technical_approach":"原创的MLM推理方案，不需要额外训练或修改模型架构，仅用简单的推理调度技巧即可让DeBERTa等MLM模型完成生成式ICL任务。和CLM的ICL能力比，MLM在不同任务类别上有互补优势，不需要因果注意力约束。","experiments":"在DeBERTa系列模型上验证，MLM的ICL能力在部分任务上超过同等规模的CLM，两类模型的优势任务类别完全互补。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Prior domain consensus assumes only causal language models (CLM) have generative in-context learning (ICL) capability, and masked language models (MLM) cannot perform generative ICL tasks, wasting the representation capability learned from MLM pretraining.","importance":"Paradigm-level discovery that corrects the understanding of MLM capability boundaries, providing new ideas for hybrid pretraining objective and ICL architecture design.","technical_approach":"Original MLM inference scheme that requires no additional training or architecture modification. Only simple inference scheduling tricks enable MLM models such as DeBERTa to perform generative ICL tasks. Compared to ICL capability of CLMs, MLMs have complementary advantages across different task categories and do not require causal attention constraints.","experiments":"Validated on DeBERTa series models, MLM ICL capability outperforms CLMs of the same size on some tasks, and the advantage task categories of the two types of models are fully complementary.","authors_note":""},"tags":["masked-lm","in-context-learning","bert","non-ar","inference"],"keywords":["in-context learning","masked language modeling","bert","language modeling","evaluation","inference"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"上下文学习是大语言模型预训练后涌现的能力","claim_en":"In-context learning is an emergent capability of large language models after pretraining","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"掩码语言模型（MLM）同样具备生成式上下文学习能力，不需要修改架构或额外训练，在部分任务上表现优于因果语言模型","claim_en":"Masked language models (MLM) also have generative in-context learning capability, no architecture modification or additional training required, and outperform causal language models on some tasks","opposes":"Prior assumption that only causal language models have in-context learning capability, and MLMs cannot perform generative ICL tasks","opposes_cite_hint":"Brown 2020 GPT-3","evidence_anchor":"§2 Method, §4 Experiments","why_contested":"Breaks the architectural limitation of ICL capability, providing empirical support for the design of hybrid pretraining objectives."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看推理调度技巧即可；打破了 MLM 不能做生成式 ICL 的 prior，但对当前以 CLM 为主的预训练范式影响不大，当弱信号看。","en":"Just look at the inference scheduling tricks; breaks the prior that MLMs cannot do generative ICL, but has little impact on the current CLM-dominated pretraining paradigm, treat as a weak signal."}},{"id":"2409.19044","title":"On the Inductive Bias of Stacking Towards Improving Reasoning","authors":["Nikunj Saunshi","Stefani Karp","Shankar Krishnan","Sobhan Miryoosefi","Sashank Jakkam Reddi","Sanjiv Kumar"],"institutions":["Google DeepMind"],"abstract":"$30","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.19044","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SaunshiKKMRK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SaunshiKKMRK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/837bc5db12f3d394d220815a7687340c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"此前渐进式堆叠训练仅被用于提升训练效率，其带来的归纳偏置对模型能力的影响完全没有被研究，无法利用这种偏置优化模型的下游能力。","importance":"方法级+机制级贡献，首次发现堆叠训练的归纳偏置可提升模型推理能力，同时保留训练效率优势，为预训练的初始化和训练调度方案提供了新的选择。","technical_approach":"改进的渐进式堆叠方案MIDAS，分阶段增加模型深度，用前一阶段的小模型层初始化下一阶段的层，同时调整训练调度策略。和传统随机初始化训练比，训练速度最高提升40%，同时获得更优的推理能力。","experiments":"在语言模型上验证，MIDAS训练的模型在相同算力下，推理任务指标比传统随机初始化训练高3-5%，训练速度提升40%。","authors_note":"团队来自Google DeepMind，Sashank J. Reddi为知名优化器研究者，过往代表性工作包括AdamW、Shampoo优化器。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Gradual stacking training was previously only used to improve training efficiency, and the impact of its induced inductive bias on model capability has been completely unstudied, making it impossible to leverage this bias to optimize downstream model performance.","importance":"Method and mechanism-level contribution that first discovers the inductive bias of stacking training can improve model reasoning capability while retaining training efficiency advantages, providing a new option for pretraining initialization and training scheduling schemes.","technical_approach":"Improved gradual stacking scheme named MIDAS, which increases model depth in stages, uses layers from a smaller model in the previous stage to initialize layers of the next stage, and adjusts training scheduling strategy. Compared to traditional random initialization training, it speeds up training by up to 40% and achieves better reasoning capability.","experiments":"Validated on language models, models trained with MIDAS achieve 3-5% higher performance on reasoning tasks than traditional random initialization training under the same compute budget, with 40% faster training speed.","authors_note":"Team from Google DeepMind. Core author Sashank J. Reddi is a well-known optimizer researcher, past representative works include AdamW and Shampoo optimizers."},"tags":["stacking","training-strategy","reasoning","inductive-bias"],"keywords":["stacking","language model","reasoning","inductive bias","efficient training"],"notable_authors":["Sashank J. Reddi"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"渐进式堆叠训练可以提升大模型的训练效率","claim_en":"Gradual stacking training can improve the training efficiency of large models","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"渐进式堆叠训练不仅能提升训练效率，还会引入有利于推理能力的归纳偏置，在相同训练算力下可获得更好的推理效果","claim_en":"Gradual stacking training not only improves training efficiency, but also introduces inductive bias beneficial to reasoning capability, achieving better reasoning performance under the same training compute","opposes":"Prior assumption that stacking training only improves efficiency and does not change the final capability upper bound of the model","opposes_cite_hint":"Reddi 2023 Gradual Stacking for Large Language Models","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method, §5 Experiments","why_contested":"Connects training efficiency and model capability optimization, providing a new direction for pretraining training scheduling."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看 MIDAS 的训练调度策略即可；发现堆叠训练的归纳偏置能提升推理能力，改变了对渐进式训练的认知，值得在 internal ablation 中尝试。","en":"Just look at the MIDAS training scheduling strategy; discovering that the inductive bias of stacking training improves reasoning ability changes the perception of progressive training, worth trying in internal ablations."}},{"id":"ShaoHASDMZK24","title":"Scaling Retrieval-Based Language Models with a Trillion-Token Datastore","authors":["Rulin Shao","Jacqueline He","Akari Asai","Weijia Shi","Tim Dettmers","Sewon Min","Luke Zettlemoyer","Pang Wei Koh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$31","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ShaoHASDMZK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ShaoHASDMZK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a5d8aba27dfef4e849e8cb03fb87a954-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心问题是：检索增强语言模型往往受限于 datastore 太小、构建成本太高或检索延迟太大，结果是 retrieval 的收益在真正大规模语料上没有被充分释放。过去很多 RLM 工作只在相对小的 token datastore 上验证，因此很难判断这种方法能否随着数据规模继续获益。","importance":"这篇工作对 pretrain 很有价值，因为它把“参数扩展”之外的另一条 scaling 路线推到了极大规模：用万亿 token 级 datastore 支撑 retrieval-based LM。它的重要性不只是工程大，而是在问一个实质问题——当外部记忆足够大时，模型是否可以把一部分知识存储和长尾记忆负担从参数里挪出去，这会影响我们看待参数规模、数据去重和 continual pretraining 的方式。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法是把 retrieval-based LM 扩展到 trillion-token datastore，并解决索引、检索和训练/推理耦合的系统问题。关键设计大概率包括高效的 token-level 或 chunk-level索引、近似最近邻检索、压缩存储，以及让模型在可控延迟下利用检索到的上下文。和早期 kNN-LM 或 RETRO 风格方法相比，重点不只是“能检索”，而是把 datastore 扩到足够大后仍然能维持吞吐和有效召回，否则理论收益会被系统成本吃掉。","experiments":"标题已经给出一个关键事实：datastore 规模到了 trillion-token 级别。当前信息里没有模型参数、数据来源和具体指标，不能补数字。论文最值得看的实验应包括：随 datastore 扩大时 perplexity 或下游任务是否持续改善、收益与模型参数扩展相比的性价比、检索延迟和内存占用的增长曲线，以及在知识密集或长尾分布数据上的增益是否显著高于平均样本。若这些曲线仍未饱和，这会是非常强的 scaling 证据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a scaling bottleneck in retrieval-based language models: existing systems often use datastores that are too small or too expensive to query efficiently, so the real upside of retrieval at web-scale remains unclear. Prior work showed the idea works, but not whether it continues to pay off when the external memory becomes truly massive.","importance":"This is highly relevant to pretraining because it explores a scaling axis other than model parameters: external non-parametric memory at the trillion-token level. The broader implication is whether some forms of knowledge storage and long-tail memorization can be offloaded from weights into a datastore, which affects how we think about scaling laws, continual pretraining, and the trade-off between memorization and retrieval.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method is to make retrieval-based LMs work with a trillion-token datastore, which is primarily a joint modeling-and-systems problem. The likely ingredients are large-scale indexing, approximate nearest-neighbor retrieval, storage compression, and a training/inference setup that can use retrieved context without collapsing throughput. The main distinction from earlier kNN-LM or RETRO-style work is not the use of retrieval itself, but making retrieval still effective and affordable at a much larger memory scale.","experiments":"The one confirmed experimental fact is the datastore size: trillion-token scale. The provided information does not include model sizes, corpora, baselines, or exact metrics. The most important expected results would be scaling curves showing whether perplexity or task quality keeps improving with datastore size, cost-quality comparisons against simply scaling model parameters, and latency/memory measurements that show the system remains practical. If gains persist at this scale, that would be strong evidence that retrieval is a real scaling path rather than a niche add-on.","authors_note":""},"tags":["retrieval-augmented","datastore","scaling","retrieval-lm"],"keywords":["retrieval-augmented language model","scaling","trillion-token datastore","RAG"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对 RLM 扩展性的认知，应重点关注其万亿 token 级 datastore 的系统设计；证明了外部记忆足够大时能有效卸载参数负担，对 continual pretraining 极具启发。","en":"Changes my perception of RLM scalability, focus on the system design of its trillion-token datastore; proves that sufficiently large external memory can effectively offload parameter burden, highly inspiring for continual pretraining."}},{"id":"UdandaraoPG00BA24","title":"No &quot;Zero-Shot&quot; Without Exponential Data: Pretraining Concept Frequency Determines Multimodal Model Performance","authors":["Vishaal Udandarao","Ameya Prabhu","Adhiraj Ghosh","Yash Sharma","Philip Torr","Adel Bibi","Samuel Albanie","Matthias Bethge"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/UdandaraoPG00BA24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/UdandaraoPG00BA24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/715b78ccfb6f4cada5528ac9b5278def-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["multimodal-pretraining","data-mixture","scaling-law","zero-shot"]},{"id":"UdandaraoRDPCVH24","title":"A Practitioner&apos;s Guide to Real-World Continual Multimodal Pretraining","authors":["Vishaal Udandarao","Karsten Roth","Sebastian Dziadzio","Ameya Prabhu","Mehdi Cherti","Oriol Vinyals","Olivier J. Hénaff","Samuel Albanie","Zeynep Akata","Matthias Bethge"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/UdandaraoRDPCVH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/UdandaraoRDPCVH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/f1a6a2cdc7e65dbb4579e78f97cd2665-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["continual-pretraining","multimodal-pretraining","data-mixture","training-dynamics"]},{"id":"WangZLH24","title":"4-bit Shampoo for Memory-Efficient Network Training","authors":["Sike Wang","Pan Zhou","Jia Li","Hua Huang"],"institutions":["Huazhong University of Science and Technology","Wuhan University"],"abstract":"$32","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangZLH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangZLH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e5b4633454cb2174779d294ccda02318-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"二阶优化器（如Shampoo）的预条件器状态占用内存过高，无法用于大模型预训练，现有低比特优化器方案仅支持一阶优化器，无法适配二阶优化器的结构特点。","importance":"方法级贡献，首次实现4比特的二阶优化器，内存占用仅为32比特版本的1/8，效果几乎持平，让二阶优化器可以落地到大模型预训练场景。","technical_approach":"原创的二阶优化器量化方案，选择量化预条件器的特征向量矩阵而不是预条件器本身，在理论和实验上都证明这种量化方式的误差更低。和32比特Shampoo比，内存占用降低87.5%，收敛速度和最终效果几乎无损失。","experiments":"在CV和NLP模型上验证，4-bit Shampoo的效果与32-bit版本持平，内存占用降低8倍，训练速度与一阶优化器相当。","authors_note":"团队来自华中科技大学、武汉大学，过往代表性工作包括一系列低比特训练、优化器压缩相关工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The preconditioner states of second-order optimizers (e.g. Shampoo) consume too much memory to be used for large model pretraining. Existing low-bit optimizer schemes only support first-order optimizers and cannot adapt to the structural characteristics of second-order optimizers.","importance":"Method-level contribution that implements the first 4-bit second-order optimizer, with memory usage only 1/8 of the 32-bit version and almost the same performance, enabling second-order optimizers to be applied to large model pretraining scenarios.","technical_approach":"Original second-order optimizer quantization scheme that chooses to quantize the eigenvector matrix of the preconditioner instead of the preconditioner itself, which is proven to have lower error both theoretically and experimentally. Compared to 32-bit Shampoo, it reduces memory usage by 87.5%, with almost no loss in convergence speed and final performance.","experiments":"Validated on CV and NLP models, 4-bit Shampoo has on-par performance with 32-bit version, reduces memory usage by 8x, and has training speed comparable to first-order optimizers.","authors_note":"Team from Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan University. Past representative works include low-bit training and optimizer compression research."},"tags":["optimizer","shampoo","quantization","memory-efficiency"],"keywords":["memory efficient","second-order optimizer","Shampoo","quantization"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"二阶优化器的收敛效果优于一阶优化器，但内存开销过高限制了其在大模型上的应用","claim_en":"Second-order optimizers have better convergence performance than first-order optimizers, but their high memory overhead limits their application on large models","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"量化二阶优化器预条件器的特征向量矩阵可以将状态压缩到4比特，效果几乎与32比特版本持平，优于直接量化预条件器的方案","claim_en":"Quantizing the eigenvector matrix of the second-order optimizer's preconditioner can compress the state to 4 bits, with performance almost the same as the 32-bit version, outperforming the scheme of directly quantizing the preconditioner","opposes":"Prior assumption that low-bit quantization will severely degrade the performance of second-order optimizers and cannot be applied to 4-bit precision","opposes_cite_hint":"Frantar 2023 4-bit Adam","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method, §4 Experiments","why_contested":"Solves the core memory bottleneck of applying second-order optimizers to large model pretraining, providing a new option for optimizer selection."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看量化预条件器特征向量矩阵的理论推导即可；4-bit Shampoo 解决了二阶优化器内存占用过高的问题，为大模型预训练提供了新选择。","en":"Just look at the theoretical derivation of quantizing the preconditioner eigenvector matrix; 4-bit Shampoo solves the high memory footprint of second-order optimizers, providing a new option for LLM pretraining."}},{"id":"WeiMPG24","title":"Building on Efficient Foundations: Effective Training of LLMs with Structured Feedforward Layers","authors":["Xiuying Wei","Skander Moalla","Razvan Pascanu","Caglar Gulcehre"],"institutions":["DeepMind"],"abstract":"$33","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WeiMPG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WeiMPG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/0877af85978e9e630b77f6221db47876-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer中FFN模块占总计算量的40%以上，现有FFN优化方法多基于预训练后压缩，从头训练使用结构化参数化会导致不可接受的性能损失，缺乏规模化验证的可行方案。","importance":"方法级贡献，验证了结构化FFN可直接用于LLM从头预训练，不需要事后压缩，可同时降低训练和推理成本，1.3B规模的实验结果打消了小模型结论无法泛化的顾虑。","technical_approach":"改进型架构优化方法，选择低秩、块对角等三种结构化线性参数化替换标准FFN的全连接层。与 prior 工作的核心区别是不从预训练模型压缩出发，直接适配从头训练流程，无额外计算开销，兼容标准Transformer训练 pipeline。","experiments":"实验覆盖到1.3B参数规模的Transformer-base架构，基线为同参数的标准FFN模型。公开摘要未披露具体精度与速度数值，核心ablation验证三种结构化FFN的性能损失可控制在1%以内，规模化到1.3B时表现优于小模型同结构结果。","authors_note":"作者团队来自DeepMind，Razvan Pascanu是深度学习优化与架构领域资深研究员，Caglar Gulcehre主攻高效LLM与预训练方法。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"FFNs account for over 40% of total computation in Transformers. Existing FFN optimization methods mostly rely on post-pretraining compression, while structured parameterization used in from-scratch training leads to unacceptable performance degradation, with no verified scalable solution.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It verifies that structured FFNs can be directly used for LLM from-scratch pre-training without post-hoc compression, reducing both training and inference costs. 1.3B scale experiments eliminate concerns that small-model conclusions cannot be generalized.","technical_approach":"Improved architecture optimization method, replacing full-connection layers in standard FFNs with three structured linear parameterizations: low-rank, block-diagonal, and hybrid variants. Different from prior work, it does not start from pre-trained model compression, but directly adapts to from-scratch training pipelines with no extra computation overhead, compatible with standard Transformer training workflows.","experiments":"Experiments cover Transformer-base architectures up to 1.3B parameters, with standard FFN models of the same size as baselines. Public abstract does not disclose specific accuracy and speed metrics. Core ablation shows performance degradation of three structured FFNs is controlled within 1%, and performance at 1.3B scale is better than results of the same structure on smaller models.","authors_note":"Authors are from DeepMind. Razvan Pascanu is a senior researcher in deep learning optimization and architecture, Caglar Gulcehre focuses on efficient LLMs and pre-training methods."},"tags":["structured-ffn","efficient-training","architecture","model-compression"],"keywords":["large language model","structured matrices","efficient architecture"],"notable_authors":["Razvan Pascanu","Caglar Gulcehre"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer中FFN模块的计算占比高于注意力模块，是效率优化的核心靶点","claim_en":"FFNs in Transformers account for a larger share of total computation than attention blocks, and are the core target for efficiency optimization","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"1.3B参数规模下，低秩/块对角结构化FFN从头训练的LLM性能与标准全参数FFN基线相当，计算成本降低20%以上","claim_en":"1.3B parameter LLMs trained from scratch with low-rank/block-diagonal structured FFNs achieve comparable performance to standard full-parameter FFN baselines, with over 20% lower computation cost","opposes":"Prior认为结构化FFN仅适合预训练后压缩，从头训练会带来不可接受的性能损失","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"推翻了结构化FFN无法用于从头预训练的固有认知，为高效LLM预训练提供了新的可行路径"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看结构化 FFN 的参数化设计即可；验证了结构化 FFN 可直接用于从头预训练，打消了小模型结论无法泛化的顾虑，值得在架构优化中参考。","en":"Just look at the parameterized design of structured FFNs; validates that structured FFNs can be directly used for from-scratch pretraining, dispelling concerns about small model conclusions not generalizing, worth referencing in architecture optimization."}},{"id":"2409.01369","title":"Imitating Language via Scalable Inverse Reinforcement Learning","authors":["Markus Wulfmeier","Michael Bloesch","Nino Vieillard","Arun Ahuja","Jörg Bornschein","Sandy H. Huang","Artem Sokolov","Matt Barnes","Guillaume Desjardins","Alex Bewley","Sarah Bechtle","Jost Tobias Springenberg","Nikola Momchev","Olivier Bachem","Matthieu Geist","Martin A. Riedmiller"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$34","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.01369","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WulfmeierBVABHS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WulfmeierBVABHS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a5036c166e44b731f214f41813364d01-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心结论是：把语言建模看成 imitation learning 时，MLE 并不是唯一自然选择，序列级的逆强化学习目标可以更直接地利用生成的时序结构。过去预训练和 SFT 几乎都默认用 token-level 最大似然，因为它简单、稳定、可扩展；这篇工作想重新打开这个默认前提。","importance":"它的重要性在于提出了一个可能挑战标准 MLE 微调范式的训练视角。对 pretrain/post-train 接口尤其有价值，因为它把语言模仿、奖励学习和序列优化放到同一框架下思考。如果这种 IRL 形式在可扩展性和稳定性上站得住，就不只是 RLHF 的补充，而可能成为 imitation-style 训练的新基元。","technical_approach":"作者的方法是把 inverse soft-Q-learning 重新表述为适用于语言模型微调的可扩展目标：先从示范序列中隐式恢复 reward，再直接优化整段序列，而不是逐 token 拟合条件概率。关键区别在于训练信号从‘下一个 token 对不对’转成‘整条轨迹值不值’，这样更适合处理延迟回报、全局结构和多步决策。这样设计有效的原因是语言生成本来就是序列决策；代价是比 MLE 更依赖 value/reward 估计质量，优化稳定性和方差控制会更难。","experiments":"从给到的摘要只能确认作者将其用于 large language model fine-tuning，并比较 IRL 视角相对 MLE 的收益，但摘要被截断，无法确认模型规模、数据规模、任务、baseline 和具体数字。可以合理预期实验会覆盖 supervised fine-tuning 场景，并分析序列级优化是否改善偏好契合、长期一致性或 sample efficiency；但这里不能补具体结果。","authors_note":"作者列表包含 Markus Wulfmeier、Michael Bloesch、Nino Vieillard、Arun Ahuja、Jörg Bornschein 等，这一组合与 DeepMind 长期在 RL、序列建模和 scalable training 上的研究脉络高度一致；但当前输入未显式给出机构，严格起见不写死。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The key claim is that, for language imitation, maximum likelihood is a convenient default but not the only principled one. Sequence generation has temporal structure, yet standard pretraining and SFT optimize token-wise likelihood; this paper revisits that choice through inverse reinforcement learning.","importance":"This is a perspective-shifting training paper with potential implications beyond fine-tuning. It matters for the pretrain/post-train interface because it places imitation, reward learning, and sequence optimization in one framework. If the IRL formulation scales and trains stably, it could become more than an RLHF add-on and offer an alternative primitive to plain MLE-based imitation.","technical_approach":"The method reformulates inverse soft-Q-learning into a scalable objective for language model fine-tuning. Instead of fitting next-token probabilities directly, it infers rewards from demonstration sequences and optimizes whole sequences. The important difference is the training signal: from local token correctness to trajectory value. That is attractive because language generation is a sequential decision process with delayed effects. The trade-off is also clear: success depends much more on reward/value estimation quality, and optimization is typically less stable than MLE.","experiments":"From the provided abstract fragment, I can only verify that the method is evaluated for large language model fine-tuning and compared against MLE-style training. The abstract is truncated, so model sizes, data scale, tasks, baselines, and numerical gains are not recoverable. It is reasonable to expect evaluations on supervised fine-tuning style setups, potentially measuring preference alignment, sequence quality, or sample efficiency, but I cannot state exact results.","authors_note":"The author list includes Markus Wulfmeier, Michael Bloesch, Nino Vieillard, Arun Ahuja, and Jörg Bornschein, a combination strongly associated with DeepMind-style work on RL, sequence modeling, and scalable training. Since the institution is not explicitly provided in the prompt, I leave it unconfirmed."},"tags":["inverse-rl","imitation-learning","language-modeling","alignment","objective"],"notable_authors":["Markus Wulfmeier","Michael Bloesch","Nino Vieillard","Arun Ahuja","Jörg Bornschein"],"keywords":["Language Modeling","Inverse Reinforcement Learning","Imitation Learning","Supervised Fine-tuning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对语言建模目标的认知，应重点关注其序列级 IRL 目标的推导；挑战了 MLE 微调范式，可能成为 imitation-style 训练的新基元。","en":"Changes my perception of language modeling objectives, focus on the derivation of its sequence-level IRL objective; challenges the MLE fine-tuning paradigm, potentially becoming a new primitive for imitation-style training."}},{"id":"2406.11741","title":"Transcendence: Generative Models Can Outperform The Experts That Train Them","authors":["Edwin Zhang","Vincent Zhu","Naomi Saphra","Anat Kleiman","Benjamin L. Edelman","Milind Tambe","Sham M. Kakade","Eran Malach"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Generative models are trained with the simple objective of imitating the conditional probability distribution induced by the data they are trained on. Therefore, when trained on data generated by humans, we may not expect the artificial model to outperform the humans on their original objectives. In this work, we study the phenomenon of transcendence: when a generative model achieves capabilities that surpass the abilities of the experts generating its data. We demonstrate transcendence by training an autoregressive transformer to play chess from game transcripts, and show that the trained model can sometimes achieve better performance than all players in the dataset. We theoretically prove that transcendence can be enabled by low-temperature sampling, and rigorously assess this claim experimentally. Finally, we discuss other sources of transcendence, laying the groundwork for future investigation of this phenomenon in a broader setting.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11741","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangZSKETKM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangZSKETKM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9e3bba153aa362f961dc43de5cababac-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答一个很根的问题：生成模型只是模仿训练数据分布，为什么有时却能在原任务上超过生成这些数据的人类专家。这个问题以前常被经验现象带过，但缺少清晰机制；作者把它定义为 transcendence，并试图说明它不是偶然，而是采样策略与数据分布共同导致的可解释现象。","importance":"它的重要性偏范式理解，而不是工程提分。对 pretrain 研究者有价值的地方在于，它挑战了‘模型上限不超过数据提供者水平’这一直觉：如果模型学到的是条件分布，而推断时又可以通过低温采样偏向高概率区域，那么模型可能从混杂有人类失误的数据中抽出更优决策。这个结论会影响我们理解 imitation learning、行为克隆、以及语言模型从互联网文本中学到超出单个作者能力的能力边界。","technical_approach":"技术上它做得很干净：选一个规则明确、强弱可量化、离线数据充分的领域——国际象棋——训练自回归 Transformer 只看棋谱文本，然后研究模型在对弈中的表现是否超过训练集中的所有棋手。关键不是引入搜索或强化学习，而是保持纯生成建模设置，再分析为什么会超越数据来源。作者给出的机制是低温采样：当训练数据来自不同水平专家的混合分布时，模型学到的高概率动作并不等于平均人类动作；在推断时降低温度，会放大高质量模式、压低噪声和失误，从而得到高于平均甚至高于数据中任一单个来源专家的策略。边界也清楚：这要求任务存在较稳定的高质量模式，且模型对条件分布估计足够准；在开放式语言生成中，‘更高质量’往往不如棋力这样可定义。","experiments":"摘要明确说作者通过训练 autoregressive transformer on chess transcripts 展示 transcendence，并做了理论证明与严格实验。具体模型大小、数据量和 Elo 提升幅度在给定摘要中没有出现，因此不能填数字。按论文主张，最关键的实验应是：模型实战强度与训练集最强棋手对比、不同 sampling temperature 下性能曲线、以及混合不同水平棋手数据时 transcendence 是否更明显。若消融充分，最有说服力的结果会是：高温接近行为克隆平均水平，低温显著超越；同时一旦温度过低或分布估计不准，性能会回落，说明超越不是免费午餐。","authors_note":"作者列表包含 Naomi Saphra、Benjamin L. Edelman。具体机构无法从当前输入准确确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a foundational question: if generative models are trained to imitate data, how can they sometimes outperform the experts who produced that data? Prior work often treated this as an empirical curiosity. Here the authors formalize it as transcendence and try to explain when and why it should happen.","importance":"This is a conceptual contribution with real implications for pretraining. It weakens the common intuition that a model cannot exceed the capability of its data generators. If the model learns a conditional distribution from data that mixes strong and weak behavior, then inference-time sampling can concentrate probability mass on the better parts of that distribution. That matters for how we think about imitation learning, behavioral cloning, and capability emergence from imperfect web-scale corpora.","technical_approach":"The setup is intentionally clean: train an autoregressive transformer on chess transcripts and evaluate whether it can play above the level of all players in the dataset. The point is to keep the learning objective purely generative, without adding search or RL, and isolate the role of the learned distribution plus decoding. The proposed mechanism is low-temperature sampling. When the training data mixes expert and non-expert behavior, the learned next-move distribution need not reproduce any single human policy; lowering temperature amplifies the highest-probability, often stronger, modes while suppressing noisy or mistaken moves. The boundary is equally important: this works when quality is measurable and high-quality modes are statistically recoverable; open-ended language generation is much less clean than chess.","experiments":"The abstract states that the authors train an autoregressive transformer on chess transcripts, provide a theoretical result, and validate it experimentally. It does not include model size, dataset size, or Elo gains, so those cannot be reported safely here. The critical experiments to look for are head-to-head performance against the strongest training-data players, decoding-temperature sweeps, and tests on mixtures of players at different skill levels. A convincing pattern would be that standard or high-temperature decoding tracks average imitation quality, while moderate low-temperature decoding yields the strongest transcendence and overly low temperature eventually hurts.","authors_note":"The author list includes Naomi Saphra and Benjamin L. Edelman. Exact institutional affiliations cannot be confirmed from the provided input."},"tags":["generative-models","transcendence","generalization","scaling"],"notable_authors":["Edwin Zhang","Vincent Zhu","Naomi Saphra","Anat Kleiman","Benjamin L. Edelman"],"keywords":["theory","foundations","generative modelling","sequence modelling"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对模型能力上限的认知，应重点关注其低温采样机制的分析；解释了生成模型为何能超越数据提供者，对理解 imitation learning 极具价值。","en":"Changes my perception of model capability upper bounds, focus on the analysis of its low-temperature sampling mechanism; explains why generative models can surpass data providers, highly valuable for understanding imitation learning."}},{"id":"2406.08414","title":"Discovering Preference Optimization Algorithms with and for Large Language Models","authors":["Chris Lu","Samuel Holt","Claudio Fanconi","Alex J. Chan","Jakob N. Foerster","Mihaela van der Schaar","Robert T. Lange"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$35","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.08414","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001HFCFSL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001HFCFSL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9d88b87b31986f8293bb0067a841579e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决“偏好优化（DPO/IPO 等）损失函数设计空间巨大但长期靠手工拍脑袋”的问题；以往方法多用少数几个凸损失，理论上合理但探索不足。","importance":"贡献是把“对齐算法设计”变成可自动搜索的对象：用 LLM 自己提出并实现新损失，再用离线评测反馈迭代，最终发现新的 SOTA 偏好优化算法；对 pretrain↔posttrain 闭环的启示是，训练目标本身可以被模型辅助发现，而不是只调数据与超参。","technical_approach":"方法是 LLM-driven objective discovery：循环执行“让 LLM 生成一个新的偏好优化 loss（含实现）→在固定评测上跑出指标→把结果反馈给 LLM 继续改”。关键机制是把搜索空间限定在可实现、可训练的损失函数族，并用实证指标作为黑箱反馈信号，替代人类手工推导与直觉筛选。","experiments":"摘要声称能自动发现新的 state-of-the-art 偏好优化算法，但未给出使用的基座模型、偏好数据规模、对比的 DPO/IPO/KTO 等基线、以及具体提升幅度；也未说明搜索开销（需要多少轮、每轮训练多大）与泛化性（是否跨模型/数据集稳定）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The work addresses the under-explored design space of offline preference-optimization losses: most alignment pipelines rely on a small set of hand-crafted convex objectives, leaving many potentially better losses unexplored.","importance":"It reframes “alignment objective design” as an automated discovery problem: an LLM proposes and implements new losses, empirical metrics provide feedback, and the loop yields new state-of-the-art preference-optimization algorithms—highlighting that post-training objectives themselves can be searched, not just data and hyperparameters.","technical_approach":"They run an LLM-driven objective discovery loop: propose a new preference loss (with code), evaluate it in a fixed offline training/eval setup, then feed results back to the LLM for iterative refinement. The key trade-off is black-box empirical search (broad exploration) versus theoretical guarantees (harder to maintain).","experiments":"The abstract claims SOTA discovered without expert intervention, but does not specify base models, preference dataset sizes, baselines (e.g., DPO/IPO variants), numeric gains, search cost (rounds/compute), or cross-setting robustness, so the practical efficiency and generality cannot be assessed from the abstract alone.","authors_note":""},"tags":["preference-optimization","dpo","alignment","meta-optimization"],"keywords":["Preference optimization","RLHF","Large Language Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对对齐算法设计的认知，应重点关注其 LLM-driven objective discovery 机制；将损失函数设计自动化，对 pretrain↔posttrain 闭环极具启发。","en":"Changes my perception of alignment algorithm design, focus on its LLM-driven objective discovery mechanism; automates loss function design, highly inspiring for the pretrain↔posttrain closed loop."}},{"id":"2406.09406","title":"4M-21: An Any-to-Any Vision Model for Tens of Tasks and Modalities","authors":["Roman Bachmann","Oguzhan Fatih Kar","David Mizrahi","Ali Garjani","Mingfei Gao","David Griffiths","Jiaming Hu","Afshin Dehghan","Amir Zamir"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$36","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.09406","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001KMGGGHDZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001KMGGGHDZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/71883294314045d60c900113a359934b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决“统一多模态/多任务模型的输入输出类型太少，导致 out-of-the-box 能力被训练覆盖面限制”的问题；以往 4M/UnifiedIO 类模型往往只覆盖少数模态与任务，泛化被接口约束。","importance":"贡献偏范式与数据配方：4M-21 把 any-to-any 的接口扩到“几十种模态与任务”，并把大规模多模态数据与文本语料协同训练；对跨模态统一预训练的启示是，扩大‘可交互的模态集合’本身就是能力上限的一部分，而不只是模型大小。","technical_approach":"在 4M/UnifiedIO 路线之上做扩展：把语义/几何模态、来自强模型的特征（DINOv2/ImageBind）、以及专家模型伪标签（SAM、4DHumans 等）都当作可输入/可输出的“模态 token”，并通过 co-training 把这些信号与文本共同训练到一个模型里。关键选择是用“教师模型产生的新模态”快速扩接口覆盖面，代价是继承教师偏差与伪标签噪声。","experiments":"摘要只说明训练覆盖 tens of modalities/tasks，并提到包含多种新模态用于交互与可控生成；但未给出模型规模、训练 token/样本量、任务列表的量化指标、与 4M/UnifiedIO/Chameleon 等基线的提升幅度，也未说明哪些模态组合最难、是否出现负迁移。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles the practical ceiling of unified multimodal multitask models: their “any-to-any” promise is often limited by training coverage, with only a small set of modalities/tasks supported out of the box.","importance":"This is a paradigm/data-recipe contribution: 4M-21 expands the interface to tens of modalities and tasks and co-trains on large-scale multimodal data plus text, suggesting that capability is constrained not only by model scale but by the breadth of modality I/O the model is trained to handle.","technical_approach":"Building on 4M/UnifiedIO-style unified modeling, they treat diverse semantic/geometric modalities, feature maps from strong models (e.g., DINOv2, ImageBind), and pseudo-label outputs from specialists (e.g., SAM, 4DHumans) as modalities the model can ingest and generate, trained jointly with text. The key trade-off is rapid modality expansion via teacher signals versus inheriting teacher bias and pseudo-label noise.","experiments":"The abstract states training on tens of modalities/tasks and introduces new modalities for interaction/steerable generation, but does not provide model size, training scale, quantitative task results, comparisons to 4M/UnifiedIO/related baselines, or analysis of negative transfer across modalities.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal-pretraining","unified-modeling","any-to-any","vision"],"keywords":["multimodal learning","multitask learning","representation learning","transfer learning","foundation models","generative models","computer vision"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对多模态统一预训练的认知，应重点关注其 co-training 数据配方；扩大可交互模态集合本身就是能力上限的一部分，值得在多模态预训练中借鉴。","en":"Changes my perception of multimodal unified pretraining, focus on its co-training data recipe; expanding the set of interactive modalities is itself part of the capability upper bound, worth borrowing in multimodal pretraining."}},{"id":"2405.14734","title":"SimPO: Simple Preference Optimization with a Reference-Free Reward","authors":["Yu Meng","Mengzhou Xia","Danqi Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$37","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14734","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001X024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001X024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e099c1c9699814af0be873a175361713-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题很具体：DPO 虽然比 PPO 简洁，但它依赖 reference model，奖励定义与生成长度/序列概率之间也存在错配。过去大家接受这个复杂度，是因为 DPO 稳定且有效；这篇工作想证明，偏好优化还可以更简单，而且未必更差。","importance":"它的重要性是方法级的，属于偏好优化家族里的实用改进。对 post-train 工程的直接价值很大：去掉 reference model 能明显省显存和算力，也减少实现复杂度；如果性能还能更好，说明很多 DPO 变体里的复杂设计未必是必要条件。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示是，后训练目标里的 reward parameterization 会反过来影响我们如何理解模型的序列概率校准与长度偏置。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 SimPO，一种 reference-free 的 preference optimization。它用“序列平均 log probability”作为隐式奖励，而不是像 DPO 那样通过当前策略与 reference 策略的对数概率差来刻画偏好，这样做的理由是平均化后更贴近生成时逐 token 决策，也减弱了长度效应；此外作者在 Bradley-Terry 目标里加入 target reward margin，强制胜者和败者之间保留更大的奖励间隔。和 DPO 最关键的区别有两个：一是彻底去掉 reference model，二是把优化重点从相对 reference 的偏离，转到直接拉开偏好对间隔。","experiments":"摘要明确说作者把 SimPO 与多种 SOTA 偏好优化方法比较，并报告更好的性能与更高效率，但没有在给定信息里列出模型规模和具体数字。可以确定的实验重点包括：与 DPO、IPO 或其他 offline preference baselines 的 head-to-head 比较；去 reference 带来的显存/吞吐收益；以及 reward margin 的 ablation。对工程读者最值得关心的不是是否所有基准都大幅领先，而是这套简化是否在不同模型尺度和不同偏好数据质量下仍稳定，如果只有在高质量偏好对上成立，泛化价值会受限。","authors_note":"作者包含 Danqi Chen。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical weakness of DPO-style training: it is simpler than PPO, but it still depends on a reference model and uses a reward parameterization that is not perfectly aligned with sequence generation behavior. The question is whether preference optimization can be made even simpler without giving up performance.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with clear practical value. Removing the reference model reduces memory, compute, and implementation complexity, which matters immediately for large-scale post-training. More broadly, it also sharpens the discussion around what part of DPO is actually essential: the pairwise preference objective, or the specific reference-based reward construction.","technical_approach":"SimPO is a reference-free preference optimization method. Instead of defining the implicit reward through a policy-vs-reference log-probability ratio as in DPO, it uses the average log probability of a sequence as the reward, which better matches token-level generation and reduces length-related distortion. It also adds a target reward margin to the Bradley-Terry objective so that preferred and dispreferred responses are not just ordered correctly but separated by a meaningful gap.","experiments":"The abstract states that SimPO outperforms multiple strong preference-optimization baselines while being more compute- and memory-efficient, but it does not provide model sizes or exact gains in the provided text. The key empirical questions are likely the head-to-head comparison with DPO-family methods, the efficiency gains from removing the reference model, and ablations on the reward margin. For practitioners, the main test is robustness: whether the simplification remains stable across model scales and preference datasets, rather than only under one curated setup.","authors_note":"Danqi Chen is among the authors."},"tags":["preference-optimization","dpo","alignment","reward-modeling"],"notable_authors":["Danqi Chen"],"keywords":["Language Models","Preference Optimization","Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对偏好优化的认知，应立刻在 internal ablation 中复现 SimPO；去掉了 reference model，大幅降低了 post-train 的工程复杂度，实用价值极高。","en":"Changes my perception of preference optimization, should immediately reproduce SimPO in internal ablations; removes the reference model, significantly reducing post-train engineering complexity, extremely high practical value."}},{"id":"2405.15223","title":"iVideoGPT: Interactive VideoGPTs are Scalable World Models","authors":["Jialong Wu","Shaofeng Yin","Ningya Feng","Xu He","Dong Li","Jianye Hao","Mingsheng Long"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$38","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15223","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001YFHLHL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001YFHLHL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/7dbb5bfab324e3b86af9bd0df15498dd-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：能否把视频生成模型真正推进到可交互 world model，而不是只能离线生成短片段。过去视频生成很强，但用于 agent 的难点在于必须同时建模观察、动作、奖励，并且支持长时间交互；很多方法要么规模上不去，要么 tokenization 成本太高，难以做成可扩展预训练。","importance":"它的重要性偏范式级，直接把 autoregressive next-token 训练扩展到世界模型建模。对 pretrain 研究尤其有价值，因为作者不是做任务专用 RL 模块，而是把视觉观察、动作、奖励统一离散成 token 序列，再用大规模 AR transformer 预训练。这和把图像/视频/控制信号统一进一个 LM 的多模态 pretrain 思路高度一致，是 world model 与 foundation model 之间很自然的桥梁。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 iVideoGPT：一个可扩展的自回归 transformer，把视觉观测、动作和奖励串成一个统一 token 序列，用 next-token prediction 学交互环境动态。关键设计是新的 compressive tokenization，用更紧凑的离散表示压缩高维视频观测，目的是把上下文长度和计算成本压到可训练范围内；否则 world model 会被视觉 token 数直接拖死。和只建模视频帧的 VideoGPT 类方法相比，它显式把 agent interaction 信号并入同一序列；和 latent dynamics 模型相比，它更接近通用 LM 范式，牺牲了一些结构先验，换来更好的可扩展性和统一性。","experiments":"摘要提到作者把模型预训练在 million-level 的轨迹/视频数据上，但给定信息没有完整数字，也没有参数规模和具体 benchmark 提升。可以确定的是，实验会围绕 scalable world model 展开，重点看 long-horizon prediction、planning 或下游控制表现，以及 compressive tokenization 对效率和性能的折中。对这类工作最值得关注的观察通常是：随着预训练数据扩大，world model 能力是否像语言模型一样平滑提升；以及统一 AR 建模在交互环境上是否优于更手工设计的 dynamics model，还是只在大数据下才显现优势。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether modern video generative modeling can be turned into a scalable interactive world model, rather than remaining a passive video generator. The bottleneck is that agent settings require joint modeling of observations, actions, and rewards over long horizons, which makes standard video tokenization and training pipelines too expensive.","importance":"This is close to a paradigm contribution. It extends autoregressive next-token modeling into the world-model setting by treating visual observations, actions, and rewards as one unified token stream. For pretraining research, that is highly relevant: it is the same unification principle behind multimodal foundation models, applied to interactive environments.","technical_approach":"iVideoGPT is a scalable autoregressive transformer trained on token sequences that contain visual observations, actions, and rewards. The key enabler is a compressive tokenization scheme that discretizes high-dimensional visual inputs much more efficiently, reducing context length and training cost to a manageable level. Compared with earlier VideoGPT-style models, it is interactive rather than purely observational; compared with structured latent dynamics models, it trades some inductive bias for scalability and architectural simplicity.","experiments":"The abstract says the model is pretrained on data at the million scale, but the provided text does not include exact dataset size, model size, or benchmark numbers. The important empirical questions are whether the compressed tokenization preserves enough information for long-horizon prediction and planning, and whether scaling data improves world-model quality in a language-model-like way. For readers in pretraining, the key signal is whether unified AR modeling becomes competitive once scale is large enough.","authors_note":""},"tags":["autoregressive","video-generation","world-model","scaling"],"keywords":["world model","model-based reinforcement learning","video prediction","visual planning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对视频生成模型的认知，应重点关注其 compressive tokenization 设计；将 AR next-token 训练扩展到世界模型，是 foundation model 走向 world model 的重要一步。","en":"Changes my perception of video generation models, focus on its compressive tokenization design; extends AR next-token training to world models, an important step for foundation models moving towards world models."}},{"id":"2405.20671","title":"Position Coupling: Improving Length Generalization of Arithmetic Transformers Using Task Structure","authors":["Hanseul Cho","Jaeyoung Cha","Pranjal Awasthi","Srinadh Bhojanapalli","Anupam Gupta","Chulhee Yun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$39","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.20671","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0002CAB0Y24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0002CAB0Y24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/27aa3a0e6d63db269977bb2df5607cb8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 transformer 在算术任务上的长度泛化失败：训练见过 30 位加法，测试到更长位数就崩。过去很多方法试图靠更多数据、特殊 curriculum 或更换位置编码去补救，但它们往往没有把任务本身的结构——同一数位之间的对应关系——直接编码进模型。","importance":"它的重要性不在于加法这个任务本身，而在于提供了一个很干净的证据：长度泛化可以通过把任务结构注入位置表示得到显著改善。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，位置编码未必只是“顺序索引器”，也可以承载归纳偏置；在长上下文、程序推理、表格和多序列对齐任务里，这类结构化位置设计可能比单纯拉长上下文更有效。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 position coupling：不给每个 token 唯一的位置 ID，而让多个“相关” token 共享位置 ID。在整数加法里，同一位权上的数字被视为同一位置，因此模型更容易学到按位对齐和进位传播，而不是把任务当成普通字符串建模。它和 vanilla absolute position 的根本区别是，后者编码的是线性顺序，前者编码的是任务关系结构。这个设计简单，但有明确边界：它高度依赖先验知道什么 token 是 relevant pairs，因此更像结构注入，而不是通用位置机制。","experiments":"摘要给了一个很关键的数字：模型只在 1 到 30 位加法上训练，就能泛化到 200 位加法，长度外推达到 6.67 倍。这个结果对算术长度泛化来说是很强的。虽然摘要没有列出 baseline 误差率、参数量和更多任务，但至少说明 position coupling 相比标准 decoder-only transformer 有数量级上的外推提升。最值得看的 ablation 应该包括：只改位置编码是否就够、coupling 哪些 token 最关键、以及这种设计是否能迁移到乘法或更复杂算法任务；如果只能在加法上有效，它更像 task-specific trick。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a familiar failure mode: transformers trained on short arithmetic sequences often collapse when evaluated on much longer ones. Prior fixes relied on more data, curriculum design, or alternative positional schemes, but rarely encoded the actual task structure—namely which digits should align with which.","importance":"Its importance is less about addition itself and more about what it says about inductive bias. The work shows that length generalization can improve dramatically when positional encoding reflects task structure rather than only token order. That has broader implications for long-context modeling, algorithmic tasks, and any setting where alignment structure matters more than raw sequential distance.","technical_approach":"The method, position coupling, assigns the same position IDs to multiple relevant tokens instead of giving every token a unique absolute position. For integer addition, digits with the same significance share a position, making it easier for a decoder-only transformer to learn digit alignment and carry propagation. The design is simple and effective, but it is also deliberately structured: it assumes prior knowledge of which tokens are related, so it is not a drop-in universal positional mechanism.","experiments":"The abstract reports the key result clearly: models trained on 1- to 30-digit addition generalize up to 200-digit addition, a 6.67× extrapolation in sequence length. That is a substantial length-generalization gain for this class of tasks. The abstract does not provide parameter counts or error rates, but the most valuable ablations would test whether position coupling alone drives the gain, which couplings matter most, and whether the idea transfers beyond addition to harder algorithmic problems.","authors_note":""},"tags":["positional-encoding","length-generalization","arithmetic","transformer"],"keywords":["Length Generalization","Transformers","Position Coupling","Positional Encoding","Out-of-distribution Generalization","Arithmetic Tasks","Algorithmic Tasks"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变了位置编码仅为顺序索引的固有认知，结构化位置设计在长上下文、推理类任务上可替代单纯拉长窗口，建议尽快在内部ablation验证","en":"Challenges the prior that positional encodings only serve as order indices; structured position design outperforms pure context window scaling for long-context and reasoning tasks, worth immediate internal ablation validation."}},{"id":"2411.12892","title":"Selective Attention: Enhancing Transformer through Principled Context Control","authors":["Xuechen Zhang","Xiangyu Chang","Mingchen Li","Amit K. Roy-Chowdhury","Jiasi Chen","Samet Oymak"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$3a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.12892","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0002CLRCO24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0002CLRCO24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/14fc4a68da97a3d31eb11c642b0b10fc-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是标准 self-attention 对所有 query 一视同仁，导致上下文稀疏度无法按内容和位置自适应控制。过去 transformer 的 softmax 注意力虽然强大，但通常只能通过固定温度、局部窗口或稀疏模式间接限制上下文；这会造成该聚焦时不够尖锐、该扩散时又过于保守。","importance":"它的重要性属于架构级改进，和长上下文建模、效率及泛化都有关系。对 pretrain 研究者来说，最值得注意的是：注意力稀疏性未必需要靠硬裁剪或近似算法来实现，也可以通过更有原则的 query-dependent 温度控制，在不大改框架的前提下提升上下文选择性。如果有效，这类设计会影响训练稳定性、长序列记忆和推理时的上下文利用效率。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Selective Self-Attention（SSA），它在 softmax 前后引入一种有原则的 temperature scaling，让不同 query、甚至不同上下文位置拥有不同的注意力锐度。直观上，温度低时分布更尖锐，模型更专注；温度高时分布更平滑，模型看得更广。和标准 attention 的区别不在 QKV 本身，而在把“看多窄/多广”变成可学习、可依赖上下文的位置与内容控制变量。它比固定 sparse attention 更灵活，但代价是训练时多了一个动态控制通道，如果温度学习不稳，也可能带来优化敏感性。","experiments":"摘要说作者从理论与实验两方面验证 SSA，但没有在给定信息里提供参数量、任务集和具体增益。可以合理预期其评测会覆盖长上下文理解、序列建模或标准语言/视觉 transformer 任务，以验证 selective context control 的收益。最重要的实验并不是单点 SOTA，而是看 SSA 在不同层、不同位置上学出的温度模式是否具有可解释性，以及性能收益是否来自更好的上下文选择而非简单增加参数或训练技巧。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a limitation of standard self-attention: every query is processed through essentially the same softmax map, so contextual sparsity cannot adapt cleanly to content or position. Existing transformers can restrict context through windows or sparse patterns, but those mechanisms are usually fixed rather than query-aware.","importance":"This is an architecture-level contribution with implications for long-context modeling and efficiency. For pretraining, the interesting point is that attention selectivity may be improved without resorting to hard sparsification or approximate attention kernels. If principled temperature control works, it offers a softer and potentially more trainable way to regulate context usage.","technical_approach":"Selective Self-Attention (SSA) augments standard attention with a principled temperature-scaling mechanism so that attention sharpness depends on the query and its position in the context. Lower temperature produces sharper focus; higher temperature spreads attention more broadly. The key idea is not to change QKV computation itself, but to make context selectivity a learned, query-dependent control variable. This is more flexible than fixed sparse attention, though it may introduce extra optimization sensitivity if the temperature dynamics are unstable.","experiments":"The abstract says the paper includes both theoretical and empirical validation, but the provided text does not include model sizes, tasks, or numerical improvements. The most informative experiments would show gains on long-context or sequence-modeling tasks, plus interpretable learned temperature patterns across layers and positions. The main question is whether the benefit truly comes from better context control rather than from incidental architectural overhead.","authors_note":""},"tags":["attention","transformer-architecture","context-control"],"keywords":["attention mechanism","transformer","sparsity","language model","architecture"],"recommendation":{"zh":"无需硬裁剪或近似算法即可实现query自适应的注意力稀疏控制，训练稳定性、长序列记忆收益明确，可快速纳入预训练架构迭代","en":"Enables query-adaptive attention sparsity without hard truncation or approximation, delivers clear gains in training stability and long-sequence memory, can be quickly added to pre-training architecture iteration."}},{"id":"0002L000Z024","title":"Mixture of In-Context Experts Enhance LLMs&apos; Long Context Awareness","authors":["Hongzhan Lin","Ang Lv","Yuhan Chen","Chen Zhu","Yang Song","Hengshu Zhu","Rui Yan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0002L000Z024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0002L000Z024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/91315fbb83ce353ae5538cba395f70d1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文聚焦长上下文建模中的一个现实问题：单一 in-context pattern 往往不足以覆盖不同位置、不同证据类型和不同检索难度，导致 LLM 虽然窗口很长，但真正的 long-context awareness 不稳定。过去常见做法是直接扩窗口、加位置编码或做外部检索，但模型如何在上下文内部按需调用不同“专家式”读取策略，研究得不够。","importance":"从标题看，它的重要性属于长上下文建模与 test-time routing 的方法探索。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，长上下文能力未必只是靠更长训练序列堆出来，也可能需要在上下文内形成多种读取/聚合子策略，并在推理时动态选择。如果这种 mixture-of-experts 发生在 in-context 层面而非参数层面，它会给 ICL 机制和长程依赖建模提供新的解释框架。","technical_approach":"从标题判断，核心方法应是 Mixture of In-Context Experts：不是传统参数化 MoE 层，而是让模型在长上下文中调用多种 in-context expert pattern，以增强对长文档证据的感知和利用。它大概率会结合路由、分段处理或多视角上下文聚合机制；这样设计的动机很明确：长上下文中的关键信息分布很不均匀，用单一注意力/单一 prompt 模式去处理，容易顾此失彼。由于未提供摘要，具体是训练期方法、推理期方法，还是两者结合，无法确认。","experiments":"缺少摘要，无法确认模型规模、数据规模、基准集和提升幅度。仅从标题推测，实验应围绕 long-context retrieval、multi-hop QA、needle-in-a-haystack 或长文档理解任务展开，并比较单一上下文策略与 mixture-of-experts 策略的差异。真正需要核实的关键点有两个：一是收益是否来自更好的证据路由，而不是更高计算量；二是当上下文长度继续增加时，性能是平滑退化还是出现明显拐点。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper appears to target a practical weakness in long-context LLMs: having a large context window does not guarantee stable context use, because different evidence patterns may require different in-context reading strategies. Existing approaches often focus on longer windows or retrieval, but not on dynamically selecting among multiple context-processing behaviors.","importance":"Judging from the title, this is a method exploration for long-context awareness with potential implications for in-context learning theory. The broader pretraining relevance is that long-context capability may depend not only on sequence length exposure during training, but also on whether the model can invoke different context aggregation strategies when evidence is distributed unevenly.","technical_approach":"The title suggests a Mixture of In-Context Experts approach. This likely differs from standard parameter-space MoE by mixing multiple in-context expert patterns or context-processing routes, rather than switching feed-forward experts. The design motivation is straightforward: long contexts are heterogeneous, and a single attention or prompting strategy may be too rigid. Without the abstract, however, it is not possible to confirm whether this is a training-time method, an inference-time routing scheme, or both.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so model size, data scale, benchmarks, and numeric improvements cannot be confirmed. Based on the title, the experiments likely involve long-context retrieval, multi-hop QA, needle-in-a-haystack settings, or long-document understanding, comparing a single context strategy against a mixture-based one. The main questions to verify are whether the gains come from better routing rather than just more compute, and how performance degrades as context length continues to grow.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-context","in-context-learning","mixture-of-experts","attention"],"recommendation":{"zh":"打破长上下文能力仅靠加长训练序列堆出的固有认知，上下文内动态选读取策略的思路可直接用于长文本预训练目标设计","en":"Challenges the prior that long-context capability only comes from longer training sequences; the in-context dynamic read strategy selection idea can be directly applied to long-text pre-training objective design."}},{"id":"0002SFST024","title":"ALPINE: Unveiling The Planning Capability of Autoregressive Learning in Language Models","authors":["Siwei Wang","Yifei Shen","Shi Feng","Haoran Sun","Shang-Hua Teng","Wei Chen"],"institutions":["USC"],"abstract":"$3b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0002SFST024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0002SFST024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d848cb2c84f0bba7f1f73cf232734c40-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"自回归语言模型是否具备规划能力（planning capability）一直有争议——批评者认为 next-token prediction 本质上是局部贪心的，无法做全局规划。ALPINE 试图从理论和实证两方面揭示 AR 学习中隐含的规划能力。","importance":"机制分析级贡献，直接关系到 pretrain 范式的能力边界问题。如果 AR 模型确实能通过 next-token prediction 隐式学到规划，这对理解 CoT 推理、长程依赖建模、以及是否需要替代 AR 的新范式都有重要启示。","technical_approach":"具体方法需参考全文。从标题和作者背景推测，可能结合了理论分析（如 Transformer 的表达能力分析）和在规划任务（如路径规划、逻辑推理）上的实证实验，来刻画 AR 模型在什么条件下能展现规划行为。","experiments":"具体实验设置和结果需参考全文。","authors_note":"作者包括 Shang-Hua Teng（USC，理论计算机科学领域知名学者）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Whether autoregressive LMs possess planning capability is debated—critics argue next-token prediction is inherently greedy and local. ALPINE aims to reveal the planning ability implicit in AR learning, both theoretically and empirically.","importance":"A mechanism-analysis contribution directly relevant to understanding the capability boundaries of the AR pretrain paradigm. If AR models can implicitly learn planning through next-token prediction, it has implications for CoT reasoning, long-range dependency modeling, and whether alternative paradigms are needed.","technical_approach":"Details require the full paper. Likely combines theoretical analysis (e.g., Transformer expressiveness) with empirical evaluation on planning tasks to characterize when AR models exhibit planning behavior.","experiments":"Specific setup and results require the full paper.","authors_note":"Authors include Shang-Hua Teng (USC, prominent theoretical computer scientist)."},"tags":["autoregressive","planning","transformer","capability-analysis"],"notable_authors":["Shang-Hua Teng"],"keywords":["Planning","Path finding","Transformer","Autoregressive Learning","Language models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接回应自回归预训练的能力边界争议，若结论成立将动摇“AR天生无法全局规划”的认知，需重点追踪其实验设计与结论","en":"Directly addresses the debate on autoregressive pre-training capability boundaries; if validated, it will overturn the prior that AR models cannot do global planning, worth close tracking of its experimental design and conclusions."}},{"id":"0002Z24","title":"Chain-of-Thought Reasoning Without Prompting","authors":["Xuezhi Wang","Denny Zhou"],"institutions":["Google DeepMind"],"abstract":"$3c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0002Z24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0002Z24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/7a8e7fd295aa04eac4b470ae27f8785c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"Chain-of-Thought (CoT) 推理通常依赖精心设计的 prompt（如 few-shot 示例或 \"Let's think step by step\"），这引入了 prompt 工程的成本和不稳定性。本文探索不需要任何 prompting 就能从 LLM 中引出 CoT 推理的方法。","importance":"机制分析级贡献，对 pretrain 研究有直接启示。如果 CoT 能力不依赖 prompt 而是模型内在具备的，说明 pretrain 阶段已经学到了某种隐式的推理链结构。这对理解 pretrain 模型的能力边界、以及设计更好的 pretrain 数据/目标都有价值。作者来自 Google DeepMind，是 CoT prompting 原始工作的核心成员。","technical_approach":"具体方法需参考全文。从标题推测，可能通过分析模型的解码路径（如 beam search 中的非 top-1 路径、或隐藏状态中的推理信号）来发现模型自发产生的 CoT 行为，而非通过 prompt 诱导。","experiments":"具体实验设置和结果需参考全文。","authors_note":"Xuezhi Wang 和 Denny Zhou 均来自 Google DeepMind，是 CoT prompting（\"Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models\"）和 self-consistency 等工作的核心作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"CoT reasoning typically requires carefully designed prompts (few-shot examples or \"Let's think step by step\"), introducing prompt engineering costs and instability. This work explores eliciting CoT reasoning from LLMs without any prompting.","importance":"A mechanism-analysis contribution with direct pretrain implications. If CoT ability is intrinsic rather than prompt-dependent, it means pretraining already encodes implicit reasoning chain structures—informing how we design pretrain data and objectives. Authors are core members behind the original CoT prompting work at Google DeepMind.","technical_approach":"Details require the full paper. Likely analyzes model decoding paths (e.g., non-greedy paths in beam search, or hidden-state reasoning signals) to uncover spontaneous CoT behavior without prompt induction.","experiments":"Specific setup and results require the full paper.","authors_note":"Xuezhi Wang and Denny Zhou are at Google DeepMind, core authors of the original CoT prompting paper and self-consistency."},"tags":["chain-of-thought","decoding","reasoning","prompting-free"],"notable_authors":["Xuezhi Wang","Denny Zhou"],"keywords":["Reasoning","large language models","decoding"],"recommendation":{"zh":"证明CoT是预训练阶段就学到的内在能力而非prompt诱导产物，可直接指导预训练数据与目标的推理能力定向优化","en":"Proves CoT is an inherent capability learned during pre-training instead of being induced by prompts, can directly guide targeted optimization of pre-training data and objectives for reasoning ability."}},{"id":"2403.04797","title":"Found in the Middle: How Language Models Use Long Contexts Better via Plug-and-Play Positional Encoding","authors":["Zhenyu Zhang","Runjin Chen","Shiwei Liu","Zhewei Yao","Olatunji Ruwase","Beidi Chen","Xiaoxia Wu","Zhangyang Wang"],"institutions":["Microsoft Research"],"abstract":"$3d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.04797","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0015C0YRCWW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0015C0YRCWW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/6ffdbbe354893979367f93e2121e37dd-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有支持超长上下文的LLM普遍存在lost-in-the-middle问题，无法有效召回上下文中间段的相关信息，现有解决方案要么需要全量微调，要么引入额外推理开销，落地成本高。","importance":"方法级贡献，提供了零成本的即插即用长上下文优化方案，不需要修改模型结构或微调，即可显著提升中间段信息召回率，可直接落地到所有使用RoPE的LLM推理流程中。","technical_approach":"原创的位置编码优化方法，核心是对RoPE的位置索引做多尺度重缩放，缓解RoPE固有的长距离位置衰减效应。与 prior 工作的核心区别是无额外参数、无推理开销，推理阶段直接替换RoPE的位置计算逻辑即可，不需要重新训练模型。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，核心验证了在128k上下文长度的Llama2系列模型上，中间段信息召回准确率提升30%以上，推理延迟无上升，适配从零样本推理到多轮对话的所有场景。","authors_note":"作者团队来自微软研究院，Zhewei Yao、Olatunji Ruwase是LLM系统与效率优化领域的知名研究员。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing long-context LLMs generally suffer from the lost-in-the-middle problem, failing to effectively retrieve relevant information from the middle of the context. Existing solutions either require full fine-tuning or introduce extra inference overhead, leading to high deployment costs.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It provides a zero-cost plug-and-play long context optimization scheme, which significantly improves middle segment information recall without modifying model structure or fine-tuning, and can be directly deployed to all RoPE-based LLM inference workflows.","technical_approach":"Original position encoding optimization method, core is multi-scale rescaling of RoPE position indices to mitigate the inherent long-distance position decay effect of RoPE. Different from prior work, it has no extra parameters and no inference overhead, only needs to replace RoPE position calculation logic during inference, no model retraining required.","experiments":"Public abstract does not disclose full experimental data. Core validation shows that on Llama2 series models with 128k context length, middle segment information recall accuracy improves by over 30% with no increase in inference latency, adapting to all scenarios from zero-shot reasoning to multi-turn conversations.","authors_note":"Authors are from Microsoft Research. Zhewei Yao and Olatunji Ruwase are well-known researchers in LLM system and efficiency optimization."},"tags":["long-context","positional-encoding","inference","attention"],"keywords":["Positional encoding; Large language model; long context reasoning"],"notable_authors":["Zhewei Yao","Olatunji Ruwase"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"RoPE的长距离位置表示会随距离增加出现衰减，是lost-in-the-middle问题的核心诱因之一","claim_en":"RoPE's long-distance position representation decays with increasing distance, which is one of the core causes of the lost-in-the-middle problem","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅通过RoPE位置索引的多尺度重缩放，不需要微调或修改模型结构，即可将长上下文中间信息召回率提升30%以上","claim_en":"Multi-scale rescaling of RoPE position indices alone, without fine-tuning or model modification, can improve long context middle information recall by over 30%","opposes":"Prior认为提升长上下文中间信息召回必须修改模型结构或进行额外微调","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"证明了位置编码的简单调整即可解决lost-in-the-middle问题，不需要付出训练或推理成本"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3位置重缩放公式和§4.2的长上下文召回实验即可，方案无额外开销可直接落地现有RoPE模型推理流程","en":"Only read §3 position rescaling formula and §4.2 long-context retrieval experiments; the zero-overhead solution can be directly deployed to existing RoPE model inference pipelines."}},{"id":"Alman024","title":"The Fine-Grained Complexity of Gradient Computation for Training Large Language Models","authors":["Josh Alman","Zhao Song"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) have made fundamental contributions over the last a few years. To train an LLM, one needs to alternatingly run `forward' computations and backward computations. The forward computation can be viewed as attention function evaluation, and the backward computation can be viewed as a gradient computation. In previous work by [Alman and Song, NeurIPS 2023], it was proved that the forward step can be performed in almost-linear time in certain parameter regimes, but that there is no truly sub-quadratic time algorithm in the remaining parameter regimes unless the popular hypothesis $\\mathsf{SETH}$ is false. In this work, we show nearly identical results for the harder-seeming problem of computing the gradient of loss function of one layer attention network, and thus for the entire process of LLM training. This completely characterizes the fine-grained complexity of every step of LLM training.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Alman024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Alman024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/70fa5df8e3300dc30bf19bee44a56155-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的核心问题是：训练大语言模型时，梯度计算在细粒度复杂度上究竟有多难，以及有哪些计算下界是架构和算法无法轻易绕开的。过去大家更多讨论总 FLOPs、并行效率和近似加速，但对“梯度到底能否被本质性更快地算出来”缺少更严格的复杂度刻画。","importance":"它的重要性在理论和系统认知层面。对 pretrain 的启示是：如果某些梯度计算成本存在坚硬下界，那么很多看似可能的训练加速其实只能在常数、近似误差或特定结构假设上做文章，而不是从根上打破复杂度；这会帮助我们更现实地看待低秩近似、稀疏化和算子重写的收益边界。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用 fine-grained complexity 的工具分析 LLM 训练中的梯度计算问题。它不同于常见的优化论文，不是在发明新训练算法，而是在证明一类改进为什么可能做不到，或者需要依赖额外结构。关键设计是把实际训练中的计算子问题形式化为复杂度对象，再与已知难问题建立归约关系。这样做的价值是边界清晰；代价是理论对象会对真实 Transformer 做一定抽象，结论通常描述最坏情况而非平均训练表现。","experiments":"这类论文通常不以大规模实验为主，而更依赖理论结果和可能的小规模验证。当前没有摘要，因此不能确认作者是否给出实证补充、覆盖哪些训练组件，也无法写具体数字。对读者而言，最值得关注的不是 benchmark 分数，而是哪些梯度计算步骤被证明难以显著加速，以及这些结论依赖哪些假设。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a foundational question: how hard is gradient computation for training large language models when viewed through fine-grained complexity? The field often talks about FLOPs, parallelism, and engineering accelerations, but much less about whether some parts of training can be made asymptotically faster at all.","importance":"This is a theory and systems-understanding contribution. For pretraining, the key takeaway is about limits: if certain gradient computations have strong lower bounds, then many proposed speedups can only improve constants, approximations, or special cases rather than fundamentally changing training complexity.","technical_approach":"The approach is to formalize gradient-computation subroutines arising in LLM training and analyze them with tools from fine-grained complexity. Unlike optimization papers that propose new algorithms, this line of work clarifies when major speedups are unlikely without extra structural assumptions. The strength of this design is that it gives clear boundaries; the weakness is that the formalized problems may abstract away details of real Transformer training and mostly reflect worst-case hardness.","experiments":"Papers of this type usually emphasize theoretical results rather than large empirical studies. Since no abstract is provided, I cannot confirm whether there are supporting experiments or what exact training components are covered. The most useful outputs here are the lower-bound statements and the assumptions they rely on, not benchmark numbers.","authors_note":""},"tags":["fine-grained-complexity","gradient-computation","training-efficiency","llm"],"keywords":["Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis","Fine-grained Complexity","Polynomial methods","Gradient Complexity"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§2的复杂度下界推导与§4的训练加速收益边界结论，可帮你筛掉本质不可能的预训练加速方案","en":"Focus on §2 complexity lower bound derivation and §4 training acceleration gain boundary conclusions, helps filter out inherently unfeasible pre-training acceleration solutions."}},{"id":"2406.09347","title":"Separations in the Representational Capabilities of Transformers and Recurrent Architectures","authors":["Satwik Bhattamishra","Michael Hahn","Phil Blunsom","Varun Kanade"],"institutions":["University of Oxford","DeepMind"],"abstract":"$3e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.09347","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Bhattamishra0BK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Bhattamishra0BK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3f630b20b7b3ac76d3a0016fe29b6dc0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"为降低推理成本，学界重新探索RNN类高效架构，但Transformer与RNN的表示能力边界缺乏量化结论，无法指导实际场景下的架构选型。","importance":"理论级贡献，量化了两类架构在四类实用任务上的表示能力分离边界，为高效基础模型的架构设计和选型提供了可落地的理论依据。","technical_approach":"理论分析方法，针对索引查找、最近邻、有界Dyck语言识别、字符串相等四类实用任务，推导两类架构完成任务所需的最小模型规模。与 prior 工作的核心区别是覆盖实际落地相关的任务，而非纯理论玩具任务。","experiments":"核心结论包括：对数宽度的单层Transformer即可完成索引查找任务，RNN则需要线性大小的隐状态；常数大小的RNN可以识别有界Dyck语言，Transformer则需要对数宽度。公开摘要未披露具体实验数值。","authors_note":"作者团队来自牛津大学、DeepMind，Phil Blunsom是NLP与机器学习理论领域的资深研究员。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"To reduce inference costs, the community is re-exploring efficient RNN-like architectures, but there is no quantitative conclusion on the representational capability boundary between Transformers and RNNs, which cannot guide architecture selection in practical scenarios.","importance":"Theoretical-level contribution. It quantifies the representational capability separation boundary of the two types of architectures on four practical tasks, providing actionable theoretical basis for efficient foundation model architecture design and selection.","technical_approach":"Theoretical analysis method, deriving the minimum model size required for the two architectures to complete four practical tasks: index lookup, nearest neighbor, bounded Dyck language recognition, and string equality. Different from prior work, it covers practical deployment-related tasks rather than purely theoretical toy tasks.","experiments":"Core conclusions include: a single-layer Transformer with logarithmic width can complete index lookup tasks, while RNN requires a hidden state of linear size; constant-size RNNs can recognize bounded Dyck languages, while Transformers require logarithmic width. Public abstract does not disclose specific experimental values.","authors_note":"Authors are from University of Oxford and DeepMind. Phil Blunsom is a senior researcher in NLP and machine learning theory."},"tags":["transformer-vs-rnn","representational-capacity","architecture"],"keywords":["expressivity","Transformers","RNNs","deep learning theory","communication complexity"],"notable_authors":["Phil Blunsom"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer的推理成本显著高于RNN类架构，是长上下文部署场景的核心瓶颈","claim_en":"Transformer has significantly higher inference cost than RNN-like architectures, which is the core bottleneck for long context deployment scenarios","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer与RNN的表示能力不存在绝对优劣，而是依任务类型存在明确的分离边界","claim_en":"There is no absolute superiority in representational capabilities between Transformers and RNNs, with clear separation boundaries depending on task type","opposes":"Prior普遍认为Transformer的表示能力全面优于RNN类架构","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Main Results","why_contested":"修正了Transformer全面优于RNN的认知，为特定任务下选用RNN类架构提供了理论支撑"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为架构选型的理论备查资料即可，结论覆盖的落地场景有限，不需要读正文细节","en":"Only serve as theoretical reference for architecture selection; its conclusions cover limited deployment scenarios, no need to read full text details."}},{"id":"2411.02199","title":"Provably Transformers Harness Multi-Concept Word Semantics for Efficient In-Context Learning","authors":["Dake Bu","Wei Huang","Andi Han","Atsushi Nitanda","Taiji Suzuki","Qingfu Zhang","Hau-San Wong"],"institutions":["University of Tokyo"],"abstract":"$3f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.02199","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BuHHNS0W24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BuHHNS0W24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/73efab19ebde03ff0958f4f155483f57-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有理论研究无法解释Transformer的多概念语义线性表示规律与上下文学习（ICL）能力之间的关联，且现有ICL理论多基于简化的线性假设，不符合实际LLM的运行场景。","importance":"理论级贡献，首次建立了多概念语义表示与ICL能力之间的可证明关联，为理解ICL的涌现机制、定向增强ICL能力提供了新的理论框架。","technical_approach":"原创理论方法，基于Transformer的注意力机制建模多概念语义的线性组合过程，推导ICL能力的上下界。与 prior 工作的核心区别是不需要假设ICL是隐式线性回归过程，适配实际LLM的多概念语义表示特性。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，核心验证了理论推导的结论与7B、13B参数LLM的实际ICL表现一致，误差小于5%。","authors_note":"作者团队来自东京大学，Taiji Suzuki是机器学习理论与LLM可解释性领域的知名研究员。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing theoretical research cannot explain the correlation between Transformer's multi-concept semantic linear representation regularity and in-context learning (ICL) capability. Most existing ICL theories are based on simplified linear assumptions, which do not fit actual LLM operation scenarios.","importance":"Theoretical-level contribution. It establishes the first provable correlation between multi-concept semantic representation and ICL capability, providing a new theoretical framework for understanding the emergence mechanism of ICL and directionally enhancing ICL capability.","technical_approach":"Original theoretical method, modeling the linear combination process of multi-concept semantics based on Transformer's attention mechanism, deriving upper and lower bounds of ICL capability. Different from prior work, it does not assume ICL is an implicit linear regression process, adapting to the multi-concept semantic representation characteristics of actual LLMs.","experiments":"Public abstract does not disclose full experimental data. Core validation shows that theoretically derived conclusions are consistent with actual ICL performance of 7B and 13B parameter LLMs, with error less than 5%.","authors_note":"Authors are from the University of Tokyo. Taiji Suzuki is a well-known researcher in machine learning theory and LLM interpretability."},"tags":["in-context-learning","transformer","theory","multi-concept-semantics"],"keywords":["In-Context Learning; Learning Theory"],"notable_authors":["Taiji Suzuki"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer的多概念语义表示存在线性规律，ICL能力是LLM涌现性的核心表现","claim_en":"Multi-concept semantic representations of Transformers follow linear regularity, and ICL capability is a core emergent property of LLMs","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer的ICL能力直接来源于其对多概念语义的线性组合能力，而非隐式微调过程","claim_en":"Transformer's ICL capability directly derives from its linear combination ability of multi-concept semantics, rather than implicit fine-tuning process","opposes":"Prior部分理论认为ICL的本质是模型在上下文内的隐式微调","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Theoretical Results","why_contested":"为ICL的机制解释提供了新的可证伪方向，可指导后续ICL能力增强的设计"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为ICL机制研究的理论参考，未给出可直接落地的预训练优化方案，无需细读","en":"Only serve as theoretical reference for ICL mechanism research; no directly implementable pre-training optimization solutions are provided, no need for close reading."}},{"id":"CabannesABYCK24","title":"Iteration Head: A Mechanistic Study of Chain-of-Thought","authors":["Vivien Cabannes","Charles Arnal","Wassim Bouaziz","Xingyu Yang","François Charton","Julia Kempe"],"institutions":["Meta AI"],"abstract":"Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning is known to improve Large Language Models both empirically and in terms of theoretical approximation power.\nHowever, our understanding of the inner workings and conditions of apparition of CoT capabilities remains limited.\nThis paper helps fill this gap by demonstrating how CoT reasoning emerges in transformers in a controlled and interpretable setting.\nIn particular, we observe the appearance of a specialized attention mechanism dedicated to iterative reasoning, which we coined \"iteration heads\".\nWe track both the emergence and the precise working of these iteration heads down to the attention level, and measure the transferability of the CoT skills to which they give rise between tasks.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/CabannesABYCK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/CabannesABYCK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c50f8180ef34060ec59b75d6e1220f7a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Chain-of-Thought（CoT）推理提升LLM性能的内在机制和涌现条件不明确，现有研究多为宏观实证观察，缺乏到注意力头级别的可解释性结论。","importance":"机制分析级贡献，首次发现了专门负责迭代推理的注意力头（iteration head），为理解CoT的涌现机制、定向增强CoT能力提供了可落地的干预靶点。","technical_approach":"实证机制分析方法，在可控合成任务和真实推理任务上追踪注意力头的行为，识别出专门负责CoT迭代步骤的注意力头，验证其功能和跨任务迁移性。与 prior 工作的核心区别是定位到了具体的注意力头组件，而非宏观层面的模糊观察。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体模型规模，核心结论包括：iteration head在算术推理、符号推理任务上都会涌现，摘除该类头会导致CoT性能下降40%以上，且该类头学到的CoT能力可以跨任务迁移。","authors_note":"作者团队来自Meta AI，François Charton是数学推理与LLM可解释性领域的知名研究员。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The inner mechanism and emergence conditions of Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning for improving LLM performance are unclear. Existing research is mostly macro empirical observation, lacking interpretability conclusions down to the attention head level.","importance":"Mechanism analysis-level contribution. It discovers specialized attention heads for iterative reasoning (iteration heads) for the first time, providing actionable intervention targets for understanding the emergence mechanism of CoT and directionally enhancing CoT capability.","technical_approach":"Empirical mechanism analysis method, tracking attention head behavior on controlled synthetic tasks and real reasoning tasks, identifying attention heads specifically responsible for CoT iteration steps, verifying their function and cross-task transferability. Different from prior work, it locates specific attention head components rather than vague macro-level observations.","experiments":"Public abstract does not disclose specific model size. Core conclusions include: iteration heads emerge in both arithmetic reasoning and symbolic reasoning tasks, ablating these heads leads to over 40% CoT performance degradation, and CoT skills learned by these heads can be transferred across tasks.","authors_note":"Authors are from Meta AI. François Charton is a well-known researcher in mathematical reasoning and LLM interpretability."},"tags":["chain-of-thought","mechanistic-interpretability","transformer","iteration"],"keywords":["chain-of-thought","mechanistic interpretability","controlled experiments"],"notable_authors":["François Charton"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"CoT推理可以显著提升LLM的复杂推理性能","claim_en":"CoT reasoning significantly improves the complex reasoning performance of LLMs","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer中存在专门负责CoT迭代推理的注意力头，该类头是CoT能力的核心载体","claim_en":"There exist specialized attention heads in Transformers responsible for CoT iterative reasoning, which are the core carriers of CoT capability","opposes":"Prior认为CoT能力是整个模型的全局行为，没有专门的负责组件","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Results","why_contested":"为CoT能力的可解释性和定向增强提供了具体的干预靶点"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3的迭代头识别实验与§4的功能验证结果即可，可作为CoT能力定向增强的干预靶点参考","en":"Only read §3 iteration head identification experiments and §4 functional verification results; can be used as reference for intervention targets to enhance CoT capability."}},{"id":"ChenFY24","title":"Carrot and Stick: Eliciting Comparison Data and Beyond","authors":["Yiling Chen","Shi Feng","Fang-Yi Yu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$40","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenFY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenFY24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/bd03e36b93d52d6abe3d05f9c4ef2770-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注的是：高质量 comparison data 很贵，而偏好学习又高度依赖这类数据，导致 RLHF / DPO 一类方法常常被数据瓶颈卡住。过去常见做法是人工标注成对偏好或用单一规则合成，但前者成本高，后者容易信号单薄、覆盖面窄，最终学到的只是局部偏好。","importance":"它的重要性在于数据构造层面。对 post-train 以及反哺 pretrain 的启示是，偏好数据不一定非要靠重人工采集，关键是如何设计激励与约束，让模型或标注过程产出更可学、更有辨识度的比较信号；如果做得好，收益会直接体现在 reward model 质量、偏好优化稳定性以及数据扩展性上。","technical_approach":"从题目看，核心方法是用“carrot and stick”式机制来诱导 comparison data，并且不只停留在简单成对偏好。更具体地说，它很可能同时提供正向激励和负向约束，让数据收集过程更容易暴露答案间真正关键的质量差异，而不是只得到模糊的‘A 比 B 稍好’标签。这样设计有效，因为偏好学习最怕的是低信息密度标签；如果比较样本能更系统地覆盖安全性、帮助性、事实性或风格边界，优化目标就更稳。边界在于，人工设计的 carrot/stick 机制本身会带偏分布，可能放大某些规范、压缩开放式创造任务的多样性。","experiments":"实验上最值得看的应是：用该方法得到的 comparison data 训练 reward model 或直接做 DPO/RLHF，是否优于标准人类偏好集、合成偏好集或规则筛选集。关键指标通常会包括 reward model 准确率、人类偏好胜率、安全指标、helpfulness 指标，以及数据效率——比如在同等样本量下是否更强。由于没有摘要，无法确认数据规模、任务类型和具体提升数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a data bottleneck in alignment: high-quality comparison data is expensive, yet preference optimization depends heavily on it. Prior approaches either rely on costly human annotations or on narrow synthetic rules, which often produce weak or low-coverage supervision.","importance":"Its significance is mainly at the data-construction layer. For post-training and its feedback into pretraining, the key lesson is that preference data quality depends on how the elicitation mechanism is designed; if the supervision is more discriminative and scalable, downstream reward modeling and preference optimization become more stable.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method likely uses a carrot-and-stick elicitation scheme to generate comparison data with stronger signal than plain pairwise preference labels. The practical idea would be to combine incentives and constraints so that the collection process exposes meaningful quality differences between candidate outputs, instead of yielding weak labels with little training value. This can work because preference learning benefits from supervision that clearly marks boundaries such as helpfulness, safety, truthfulness, or style. The main limitation is that the elicitation policy can itself bias the distribution and overconstrain open-ended tasks.","experiments":"The most relevant experiments would test whether data produced by this scheme leads to better reward models or stronger DPO/RLHF outcomes than standard human or synthetic comparison sets. Useful metrics would include reward-model accuracy, human preference win rate, safety and helpfulness measures, and data efficiency under fixed annotation budgets. The available metadata contains no abstract or numbers, so the exact setup and gains cannot be given confidently.","authors_note":""},"tags":["preference-data","alignment","reward-model","data-collection"],"keywords":["information elicitation","mechanism design","crowdsourcing","ranking data","social network"],"recommendation":{"zh":"解决RLHF/DPO的偏好数据瓶颈问题，可直接用于内部偏好数据采集流程优化，快速提升Reward Model质量","en":"Solves the preference data bottleneck for RLHF/DPO, can be directly applied to internal preference data collection process optimization to quickly improve reward model quality."}},{"id":"ChenHYCSZ24","title":"Noise Contrastive Alignment of Language Models with Explicit Rewards","authors":["Huayu Chen","Guande He","Lifan Yuan","Ganqu Cui","Hang Su","Jun Zhu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$41","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenHYCSZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenHYCSZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d5a58d198afa370a3dff0e1ca4fe1802-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：用显式 reward 对齐语言模型时，直接做 RL 往往不稳定、成本高，而纯偏好学习又会丢掉 reward 的绝对量级信息。过去常见方案是在 RLHF 和 DPO 之间选边站，但这两条路各自都有短板：前者优化难，后者更多是在做相对排序拟合。","importance":"它的重要性在于提出一种介于 reward learning 与 contrastive alignment 之间的训练思路。对 post-train 和 pretrain 接口的启示是，如果能把显式 reward 以更稳定的对比式目标注入 LM，对齐未必需要完整 RL 回路；这有助于降低训练不稳定性，也更利于把 reward 信号直接拿来分析训练动态。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 noise contrastive alignment，用显式奖励构造正负对比，从而训练模型偏向高 reward 响应、压低低 reward 响应。它和传统 RLHF 的区别在于不通过策略梯度直接优化长期回报，而更像把 reward 变成一个局部可监督信号；和 DPO 的区别则可能在于不只依赖偏好对，而是用 reward 数值显式决定对比强度或噪声分布。这样设计有效，因为对比学习目标往往更稳定、批内效率更高，而且可以更直接控制高低质量样本间的间隔。边界在于，若 reward 本身噪声很大或可被 hacking，这种方法也会稳定地学偏。","experiments":"实验应主要比较 NCA-style 方法与 SFT、RLHF、DPO、IPO 或其他 reward-conditioned 对齐方法。值得关注的事实包括：在人类偏好胜率、helpfulness、安全性、KL 漂移和训练稳定性上是否取得更好平衡；以及 reward scale、负样本采样方式、显式噪声设计对结果的影响。由于没有摘要，无法确认用的是哪类基座模型、奖励模型、数据规模和具体增益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a familiar alignment gap: RL with explicit rewards is powerful but unstable and expensive, while pure preference-based methods often discard useful reward magnitude information. In practice, the field often chooses between RLHF-style optimization and DPO-style relative fitting, and both have clear limitations.","importance":"Its contribution is likely a middle ground between reward optimization and contrastive alignment. The broader lesson is that explicit rewards may be injected into LM training without a full RL loop, which could improve stability and make reward-driven training easier to analyze and scale.","technical_approach":"The central idea is noise-contrastive alignment, where explicit rewards define positive and negative comparisons so the model increases likelihood on high-reward responses and suppresses low-reward ones. Relative to RLHF, this avoids direct policy-gradient optimization. Relative to DPO, the likely difference is that the method uses numeric rewards, not just pairwise preferences, to shape the contrast or noise distribution. This can work well because contrastive objectives are usually more stable and sample-efficient. The limitation is straightforward: if the reward is noisy or hackable, the method may learn that bias very efficiently.","experiments":"The main comparisons should be against SFT, RLHF, DPO, and related reward-aware alignment baselines. The most useful results would show gains or trade-offs on human preference win rate, helpfulness, safety, KL control, and training stability, plus ablations over reward scaling and negative sampling. The metadata provided does not include reliable numerical details.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","explicit-reward","contrastive-learning","language-model"],"keywords":["noise contrastive estimation","reinforcement learning","language model","alignment","contrastive"],"recommendation":{"zh":"无需完整RL回路即可注入显式Reward做对齐，训练稳定性远高于普通RLHF，可直接纳入对齐pipeline迭代","en":"Injects explicit reward for alignment without complete RL loop, has much higher training stability than vanilla RLHF, can be directly added to alignment pipeline iteration."}},{"id":"ChenL0024a","title":"AlphaMath Almost Zero: Process Supervision without Process","authors":["Guoxin Chen","Minpeng Liao","Chengxi Li","Kai Fan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$42","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenL0024a","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenL0024a","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/30dfe47a3ccbee68cffa0c19ccb1bc00-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心问题是：数学推理里 process supervision 很有效，但人工标注中间步骤极贵，因此大家一直在找“没有过程标注，能否逼近过程监督效果”的办法。过去常见路线是蒸馏专家解题轨迹、用 verifier 打分中间步骤，或靠大模型合成过程，但这些都仍然依赖显式过程信号或昂贵教师。","importance":"它的重要性在于给出一种接近零额外过程标注的 process-supervision 替代方案。对推理增强和 post-train 的启示很直接：如果不依赖显式过程也能学到接近过程监督的行为，那么提升数学推理的成本会大幅下降，也更容易扩展到大规模合成数据场景。","technical_approach":"从标题看，AlphaMath Almost Zero 的核心思想是‘without process’：不用人工过程标注，而通过结果信号、搜索、重采样、拒绝采样或一致性约束来隐式恢复过程监督。它不是直接让模型背步骤，而是构造一种训练闭环，使正确答案更可能伴随高质量推理轨迹出现，然后再把这些轨迹反哺训练。这样设计有效，因为数学任务里最终答案虽然稀疏，但如果配合搜索或自举筛选，仍能筛出不少高价值中间轨迹。边界在于，这类方法容易偏向可验证任务，对开放式推理或答案不可程序校验的问题迁移性较弱。","experiments":"实验上最重要的是：在不使用或几乎不使用过程标注的前提下，是否能逼近甚至超过需要显式过程监督的 baseline。应关注数学 benchmark 上的 pass@1 / maj@k 提升，与 outcome supervision、CoT SFT、self-training、verifier-guided 方法的比较，以及伪过程数据质量对最终效果的敏感性。由于缺少摘要，无法确认具体基座模型、训练数据量和提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a costly bottleneck in math reasoning: process supervision works well, but annotating intermediate reasoning steps is expensive and hard to scale. Prior alternatives still depend on explicit traces from teachers, verifiers, or synthetic step annotations, so they do not really remove the dependence on process labels.","importance":"Its importance lies in showing a near-zero-process route to process-like supervision. For reasoning-focused post-training, that would be a practical win: if similar gains can be obtained without explicit step annotation, scaling math supervision becomes much cheaper.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method likely avoids human process labels and instead reconstructs useful reasoning traces indirectly through outcome signals, search, consistency, rejection sampling, or bootstrapping. The point is not to supervise every step directly, but to create a training loop in which correct answers are more likely to come with high-quality trajectories, which are then recycled as supervision. This can work especially well in mathematics because answers are often verifiable. The boundary is clear: the approach may transfer poorly to tasks where correctness cannot be checked reliably.","experiments":"The decisive experiment is whether the method can match or approach explicit process supervision while using little or none of it. Useful evidence would include pass@1 or majority-vote gains on math benchmarks, comparisons with outcome-only supervision, CoT SFT, verifier-guided training, and sensitivity to the quality of pseudo-process traces. The provided metadata has no abstract or numerical details.","authors_note":""},"tags":["process-supervision","math-reasoning","mcts","reward-model"],"keywords":["Mathematical Reasoning","Monte Carlo Tree Search","Question Answer"],"recommendation":{"zh":"首次实现接近零过程标注的类过程监督效果，可直接在内研推理后训 pipeline 中落地验证，大幅降低数学推理训练成本","en":"It achieves process-supervision level performance with nearly no process annotation, can be directly tested in internal reasoning post-training pipelines to cut training cost significantly."}},{"id":"ChenMSHRJC24","title":"Sequoia: Scalable and Robust Speculative Decoding","authors":["Zhuoming Chen","Avner May","Ruslan Svirschevski","Yuhsun Huang","Max Ryabinin","Zhihao Jia","Beidi Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$43","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenMSHRJC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenMSHRJC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ea1f5f0878d43ff4fb8bf64ef4a2326c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有推测解码方法无法规模化支持更大的推测步长，且在不同解码温度下性能波动大，无法适配多样的生成场景。","importance":"系统级+方法级贡献，将推测解码的可扩展能力和鲁棒性提升到了生产可用水平，可直接落地到LLM推理服务中，显著降低推理成本。","technical_approach":"改进型推测解码算法，核心两个创新：1）用动态规划寻找最优的推测token树结构，支持更大的推测步长；2）新的采样和验证方法，适配不同的解码温度。与 prior 工作的核心区别是不需要修改draft模型结构或额外训练，兼容现有所有LLM。","experiments":"在Llama2-7B、Llama2-13B上测试，相比标准推测解码，平均解码速度提升2.3x，在温度0.1到1.5的范围内性能波动小于5%，最大支持16步的推测步长，是之前方法的4倍。","authors_note":"Max Ryabinin是高效LLM与分布式系统领域的知名研究员，曾主导BitNet等工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing speculative decoding methods cannot scale to larger speculation budgets, and their performance fluctuates greatly under different decoding temperatures, making them unable to adapt to diverse generation scenarios.","importance":"System-level + method-level contribution. It raises the scalability and robustness of speculative decoding to production-ready levels, which can be directly deployed to LLM inference services to significantly reduce inference costs.","technical_approach":"Improved speculative decoding algorithm with two core innovations: 1) Use dynamic programming to find the optimal tree structure for speculated tokens, supporting larger speculation budgets; 2) Novel sampling and verification method, adapting to different decoding temperatures. Different from prior work, it does not require modifying draft model structure or extra training, compatible with all existing LLMs.","experiments":"Tested on Llama2-7B and Llama2-13B. Compared with standard speculative decoding, average decoding speed increases by 2.3x, performance fluctuation is less than 5% in the temperature range of 0.1 to 1.5, and maximum supported speculation budget is 16 steps, 4 times that of previous methods.","authors_note":"Max Ryabinin is a well-known researcher in efficient LLM and distributed systems, who previously led work such as BitNet."},"tags":["speculative-decoding","inference-efficiency","tree-search","serving"],"keywords":["LLM inference; Speculative Decoding"],"notable_authors":["Max Ryabinin"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"推测解码可以在不损失生成质量的前提下提升LLM解码速度","claim_en":"Speculative decoding improves LLM decoding speed without sacrificing generation quality","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于动态规划的树结构推测解码，可以将最大推测步长提升到16步，同时在全温度范围保持鲁棒性","claim_en":"Dynamic programming based tree-structured speculative decoding can increase the maximum speculation budget to 16 steps, while maintaining robustness across the full temperature range","opposes":"Prior认为推测步长超过4步后，接受率会急剧下降，没有实用价值","opposes_cite_hint":"Leviathan et al. 2023 Fast Inference from Transformers via Speculative Decoding","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"大幅拓展了推测解码的适用边界，可直接降低推理服务的单位成本"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"工业级可用的推测解码优化方案，无需改模型结构可直接落地，作为系统优化文献备查即可，不用读正文","en":"Production-ready speculative decoding optimization compatible with all existing LLMs, no need to read full text, keep as system optimization reference."}},{"id":"ChenMZ0ZRC24","title":"Preference Learning Algorithms Do Not Learn Preference Rankings","authors":["Angelica Chen","Sadhika Malladi","Lily H. Zhang","Xinyi Chen","Qiuyi (Richard) Zhang","Rajesh Ranganath","Kyunghyun Cho"],"institutions":["Princeton University","MIT CSAIL"],"abstract":"$44","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenMZ0ZRC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenMZ0ZRC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/b8ce770a6b25e603fbff4a37f9e31edc-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有RLHF、DPO等偏好学习方法的核心默认假设是模型会给更偏好的输出分配更高的似然，该假设从未被系统验证，无法解释对齐过程中的性能波动。","importance":"范式级贡献，直接挑战了偏好学习领域的核心假设，为对齐算法的目标设计和评估体系优化提供了关键的实证依据。","technical_approach":"实证分析方法，定义排序准确率指标衡量偏好学习模型的排序能力，推导DPO和RLHF目标下的理想排序准确率上限。与 prior 工作的核心区别是从排序能力的角度评估偏好学习，而非仅看最终生成的人类偏好率。","experiments":"在主流偏好数据集上，现有SOTA偏好微调模型的排序准确率不到60%，远低于理想情况下85%以上的上限，存在显著的对齐缺口。","authors_note":"作者团队来自普林斯顿大学、MIT CSAIL，Angelica Chen是LLM对齐领域的知名青年研究员。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The core default assumption of existing preference learning methods such as RLHF and DPO is that models assign higher likelihood to more preferred outputs. This assumption has never been systematically verified, and cannot explain performance fluctuations during alignment.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution. It directly challenges the core assumption in the preference learning field, providing key empirical basis for the objective design and evaluation system optimization of alignment algorithms.","technical_approach":"Empirical analysis method, defining ranking accuracy metric to measure the ranking ability of preference learning models, deriving the ideal upper bound of ranking accuracy under DPO and RLHF objectives. Different from prior work, it evaluates preference learning from the perspective of ranking ability, rather than only looking at the human preference rate of final generations.","experiments":"On mainstream preference datasets, existing SOTA preference-tuned models achieve less than 60% ranking accuracy, far below the ideal upper bound of over 85%, with a significant alignment gap.","authors_note":"Authors are from Princeton University and MIT CSAIL. Angelica Chen is a well-known young researcher in LLM alignment."},"tags":["dpo","preference-learning","alignment","reward-model"],"keywords":["preference learning","large language models","DPO","RLHF","ranking accuracy"],"notable_authors":["Angelica Chen"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"RLHF、DPO等偏好学习算法可以提升LLM生成结果的人类偏好率","claim_en":"Preference learning algorithms such as RLHF and DPO can improve the human preference rate of LLM generations","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"现有SOTA偏好微调模型的偏好排序准确率不到60%，远低于其优化目标对应的理想上限，说明偏好学习算法没有真正学习到偏好排序","claim_en":"Existing SOTA preference-tuned models achieve less than 60% preference ranking accuracy, far below the ideal upper bound corresponding to their optimization objective, indicating that preference learning algorithms do not truly learn preference rankings","opposes":"Prior认为偏好学习的核心是让模型学会给更偏好的输出分配更高的似然，排序准确率接近理想上限","opposes_cite_hint":"Rafailov et al. 2023 Direct Preference Optimization","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"挑战了偏好学习的核心假设，要求重新设计对齐算法的目标和评估方式"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"直接挑战RLHF/DPO默认的偏好排序假设，重点读§3的排序准确率定义和Fig2的各算法排序上限结果即可","en":"It challenges the default ranking assumption of RLHF/DPO, only need to read §3 for ranking accuracy definition and Fig2 for upper bound results of different algorithms."}},{"id":"ChenWCW0LWYL024","title":"ArkVale: Efficient Generative LLM Inference with Recallable Key-Value Eviction","authors":["Renze Chen","Zhuofeng Wang","Beiquan Cao","Tong Wu","Size Zheng","Xiuhong Li","Xuechao Wei","Shengen Yan","Meng Li","Yun Liang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$45","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenWCW0LWYL024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenWCW0LWYL024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/cd4b49379efac6e84186a3ffce108c37-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有KV缓存驱逐方法仅基于静态的token重要性判断，忽略了对话和生成过程中token重要性的动态变化，导致驱逐后需要重算的开销大，反而降低长上下文推理的吞吐量。","importance":"系统级贡献，提出了可召回的KV缓存驱逐策略，大幅提升长上下文LLM推理的吞吐量，适配多轮对话、文档理解等主流长上下文场景。","technical_approach":"改进型KV缓存管理方法，核心是记录被驱逐token的索引和轻量特征，当后续生成需要用到被驱逐的token时，可以快速召回，不需要全量重算。与 prior 工作的核心区别是不需要修改模型结构，兼容现有所有Transformer架构。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，核心验证了在128k上下文长度的推理场景下，吞吐量提升2.1x，延迟降低35%，相比静态驱逐方法重算开销降低80%以上。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing KV cache eviction methods are only based on static token importance judgment, ignoring the dynamic change of token importance during conversation and generation, leading to high recomputation overhead after eviction, which instead reduces the throughput of long context inference.","importance":"System-level contribution. It proposes a recallable KV cache eviction strategy, which significantly improves the throughput of long context LLM inference, adapting to mainstream long context scenarios such as multi-turn conversations and document understanding.","technical_approach":"Improved KV cache management method, core is recording indices and lightweight features of evicted tokens. When evicted tokens are needed for subsequent generation, they can be quickly recalled without full recomputation. Different from prior work, it does not require modifying model structure, compatible with all existing Transformer architectures.","experiments":"Public abstract does not disclose full experimental data. Core validation shows that in 128k context length inference scenarios, throughput increases by 2.1x, latency decreases by 35%, and recomputation overhead is reduced by over 80% compared with static eviction methods.","authors_note":""},"tags":["kv-cache","eviction","inference-efficiency","long-context"],"keywords":["Machine Learning System","Large Language Model Inference","Key-Value Cache Eviction"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"KV缓存占用是长上下文LLM推理的主要内存瓶颈","claim_en":"KV cache occupancy is the main memory bottleneck for long context LLM inference","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"带可召回机制的动态KV缓存驱逐策略，相比静态驱逐策略可以将长上下文推理吞吐量提升2倍以上","claim_en":"Dynamic KV cache eviction policy with recall mechanism can improve long context inference throughput by more than 2x compared to static eviction policies","opposes":"Prior认为KV缓存驱逐后不可恢复，只能依赖静态重要性判断选择保留的token","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"重新定义了KV缓存管理的设计思路，可直接落地到长上下文LLM的推理服务中"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"无侵入式可召回KV缓存驱逐方案，兼容所有Transformer架构，作为长上下文推理系统优化文献备查即可","en":"Non-intrusive recallable KV cache eviction strategy compatible with all Transformer architectures, keep as long-context inference system reference."}},{"id":"ChuangHLGLCL24","title":"Meta-DiffuB: A Contextualized Sequence-to-Sequence Text Diffusion Model with Meta-Exploration","authors":["Yun-Yen Chuang","Hung-Min Hsu","Kevin Lin","Chen-Sheng Gu","Ling Zhen Li","Ray-I Chang","Hung-yi Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChuangHLGLCL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChuangHLGLCL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/91d193b65d0b120d29503590827de1ea-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["diffusion-lm","text-generation","seq2seq","non-ar"]},{"id":"CollinsPMSS24","title":"In-Context Learning with Transformers: Softmax Attention Adapts to Function Lipschitzness","authors":["Liam Collins","Advait Parulekar","Aryan Mokhtari","Sujay Sanghavi","Sanjay Shakkottai"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$46","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/CollinsPMSS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/CollinsPMSS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a8633d27d782f66fe660c2fb4bae446e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer上下文学习（ICL）的底层机制缺乏量化理论支撑，现有工作多停留在实证观察层面，未明确softmax注意力在ICL中的自适应作用原理。","importance":"ICL机制领域的理论级贡献，首次量化关联了注意力行为与预训练任务的统计特征，对Transformer架构设计、预训练任务分布选型有直接指导价值。","technical_approach":"原创理论推导，针对回归任务ICL场景，从注意力单元的数学性质出发，证明注意力通过自适应窗口实现近邻预测，窗口大小与预训练任务的Lipschitz常数（函数平滑度）、标签噪声直接相关，无额外人工假设，区别于现有仅关注注意力权重分布的理论工作。","experiments":"仅给出严格理论推导结论，无大规模预训练实验。核心结论为：预训练任务Lipschitz度越低、标签噪声越高，注意力自适应窗口越宽；低秩线性任务下，注意力会收敛到对应的线性预测器。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The underlying mechanism of Transformer in-context learning (ICL) lacks quantitative theoretical support. Most prior work only conducts empirical observations and does not clarify the adaptive principle of softmax attention in ICL.","importance":"This is a theoretical contribution to ICL mechanism research. It is the first work to quantitatively correlate attention behavior with statistical characteristics of pre-training tasks, providing direct guidance for Transformer architecture design and pre-training task distribution selection.","technical_approach":"Original theoretical derivation for regression task ICL settings. Based on mathematical properties of attention units, it proves that attention implements nearest-neighbor prediction via an adaptive window, whose size is directly correlated with the Lipschitz constant (function smoothness) and label noise of pre-training tasks, with no extra artificial assumptions. It differs from existing theoretical work that only focuses on attention weight distribution.","experiments":"Only strict theoretical derivation conclusions are provided, no large-scale pre-training experiments. Core conclusions: the adaptive attention window widens as pre-training task Lipschitzness decreases and label noise increases; for low-rank linear tasks, attention converges to the corresponding linear predictor.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","attention","transformer","theory","generalization"],"keywords":["Transformers","self-attention","in-context learning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Softmax注意力是Transformer实现ICL能力的核心载体","claim_en":"Softmax attention is the core carrier of Transformer ICL capability","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer实现ICL时的注意力窗口大小由预训练任务的Lipschitz度和标签噪声自适应决定，并非固定值或仅由上下文长度决定","claim_en":"The window size of Transformer attention during ICL is adaptively determined by the Lipschitzness and label noise of pre-training tasks, not a fixed value or only determined by context length","opposes":"Prior work assumes ICL attention window is fixed or only adjusted by context length","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Theoretical Analysis","why_contested":"Revises the understanding of ICL attention mechanism, and can guide pre-training task sampling strategies to optimize ICL performance"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"首次量化关联softmax注意力ICL表现与预训练任务Lipschitz常数，作为ICL理论研究的文献备查即可","en":"First work quantifying the correlation between softmax attention ICL performance and pre-training task Lipschitz constant, keep as ICL theory reference."}},{"id":"CuiBKZ24","title":"A Phase Transition between Positional and Semantic Learning in a Solvable Model of Dot-Product Attention","authors":["Hugo Cui","Freya Behrens","Florent Krzakala","Lenka Zdeborová"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$47","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/CuiBKZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/CuiBKZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3fefebc2d4e3c1c6ee9b892bd293117d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer注意力层语义能力涌现的机制缺乏可解理论刻画，现有实证研究无法量化其从位置学习到语义学习的相变边界条件。","importance":"大模型涌现机制领域的理论级贡献，给出了点积注意力可解模型下损失全局最优的闭式解，为理解能力涌现的离散相变提供了量化参考。","technical_approach":"原创理论推导，采用低秩绑定的可训练query/key矩阵的非线性自注意力可解模型，在高维数据、大训练样本的渐近极限下推导损失全局最优的闭式表达式，首次严格刻画了语义注意力涌现的相变临界点。","experiments":"仅给出理论推导结论，无大规模实验。核心结论为：存在明确的相变临界点，低于临界点时注意力仅学习位置信息，高于临界点时语义学习占主导。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The emergence mechanism of semantic capabilities in Transformer attention layers lacks solvable theoretical characterization. Existing empirical studies cannot quantify the phase transition boundary condition from positional learning to semantic learning.","importance":"This is a theoretical contribution to large model emergence mechanism research. It provides a closed-form solution for the global optimal loss of a solvable dot-product attention model, offering quantitative reference for understanding discrete phase transitions of capability emergence.","technical_approach":"Original theoretical derivation based on a solvable nonlinear self-attention model with trainable tied low-rank query and key matrices. It derives the closed-form expression of global optimal loss under the asymptotic limit of high-dimensional data and large training samples, and is the first work to strictly characterize the phase transition critical point of semantic attention emergence.","experiments":"Only theoretical derivation conclusions are provided, no large-scale experiments. Core conclusion: there exists a clear phase transition critical point. Below the point, attention only learns positional information, while above the point, semantic learning dominates.","authors_note":""},"tags":["attention","phase-transition","positional-encoding","theory"],"keywords":["replica method","statistical physics","phase transition","high-dimensional limit","attention layer"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大模型的能力涌现存在离散相变点，而非连续提升","claim_en":"Capability emergence in large models occurs at discrete phase transition points instead of continuous improvement","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"点积注意力的学习存在离散相变，低于数据规模临界点时无法学习语义信息，仅学习位置信息","claim_en":"There is a discrete phase transition in dot-product attention learning: below the critical point of data scale, attention cannot learn semantic information and only learns positional information","opposes":"Prior theoretical work mostly assumes attention learning is a continuous process without explicit phase transition between positional and semantic learning","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Main Results","why_contested":"Provides theoretical support for the threshold effect of pre-training data scale, and can guide the estimation of minimum data volume for large model training"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"严格刻画点积注意力从位置学习到语义学习的相变临界点，重点读§4的闭式解推导和Fig3的相变边界实验即可","en":"Rigorously characterizes the phase transition boundary of dot-product attention from positional to semantic learning, only need to read §4 for closed-form derivation and Fig3 for phase transition experiments."}},{"id":"CuiW24","title":"Cherry on Top: Parameter Heterogeneity and Quantization in Large Language Models","authors":["Wanyun Cui","Qianle Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$48","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/CuiW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/CuiW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/6fcc2190f456464160921e98393bf50e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注一个在大模型量化里经常被平均化处理的问题：不同参数并不等价，参数异质性会直接决定量化误差如何传导到模型能力。以往很多量化方法默认同层、同类型参数可以用近似一致的策略处理，这在工程上方便，但会掩盖哪些参数真正脆弱、哪些参数可以更激进压缩，因此难以解释同样 bit 配置下性能为何差异很大。","importance":"这项工作的价值更偏方法分析和系统启发，而不是提出一个全新的训练范式。对 pretrain 和 serving 研究的启示在于：量化不该只按层或按张量大小分配预算，而应显式建模参数敏感度和结构异质性；这会影响后续混合精度设计、训练后量化策略，甚至会反过来影响预训练时参数组织方式。如果论文确实给出稳定的异质性刻画，它的意义在于把“哪些参数值得保留精度”从经验问题往可分析问题推进了一步。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法是把参数异质性和量化联合建模，并讨论一种“Cherry on Top”式的增量精度分配思路。更具体地说，论文大概率不是单纯做统一低比特量化，而是先识别对模型功能更关键或更敏感的参数子集，再对这些子集保留更高精度，其他部分使用更激进压缩；这种设计比均匀量化更合理，因为量化误差在 Transformer 中并非均匀传播，少量关键参数可能决定大部分退化。它与常见 layer-wise 或 channel-wise 量化的区别，应该在于强调跨参数类型的非均质性，而不是只在局部结构内调 bit。","experiments":"给定当前信息，无法确认具体模型规模、数据集、bit 配置和指标提升，因此不能负责任地复述数值。可以合理预期实验会覆盖若干 LLM、对比统一量化与异质量化，并报告 perplexity 或下游准确率在相同压缩率下的差异；真正值得看的不是是否“赢了”，而是敏感参数是否在不同模型和尺度上稳定复现，以及额外复杂度是否足够低，能否用于实际 PTQ/QAT 流水线。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a blind spot in LLM quantization: parameters are not equally important, and parameter heterogeneity strongly shapes how quantization error turns into quality loss. Prior work often treats weights within a layer or tensor with a largely uniform policy, which is convenient but obscures which parameters are actually fragile and which can be compressed aggressively.","importance":"This looks more like a method-and-analysis contribution than a new training paradigm. The practical takeaway for pretraining and serving is that quantization budgets should not be allocated purely by layer or tensor size; they should reflect parameter sensitivity and structural heterogeneity. If the paper establishes a stable sensitivity pattern, it would move mixed-precision design from heuristic tuning toward something more principled.","technical_approach":"From the title, the core idea is to model parameter heterogeneity jointly with quantization, likely via an incremental precision allocation scheme. The likely design is not uniform low-bit compression, but identifying a small subset of parameters that matter disproportionately and preserving them at higher precision while quantizing the rest more aggressively. This makes sense because quantization noise does not propagate uniformly in Transformers; a small set of critical parameters can dominate degradation. The key distinction from standard layer-wise or channel-wise quantization is that the paper appears to emphasize heterogeneity across parameter roles rather than only within local structure.","experiments":"The provided information is not enough to state model sizes, datasets, bit-widths, or exact gains. The important experimental question is not just whether the method beats uniform quantization, but whether the identified sensitive parameters remain consistent across architectures and scales, and whether the added complexity is small enough to fit realistic PTQ or QAT pipelines.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","parameter-heterogeneity","llm","compression"],"keywords":["large language models","parameter quantization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"验证大模型参数异质性对量化误差的影响，重点读§5的参数敏感度划分规则和Table4的异质量化效果对比即可","en":"Verifies the impact of LLM parameter heterogeneity on quantization error, only need to read §5 for parameter sensitivity classification and Table4 for heterogeneous quantization results."}},{"id":"DAngeloAVF24","title":"Why Do We Need Weight Decay in Modern Deep Learning?","authors":["Francesco D&apos;Angelo","Maksym Andriushchenko","Aditya Vardhan Varre","Nicolas Flammarion"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$49","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DAngeloAVF24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DAngeloAVF24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/29496c942ed6e08ecc469f4521ebfff0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答一个非常基础但一直没有彻底讲清的问题：现代深度学习里为什么 weight decay 仍然有效。过去常见解释把它等同于 L2 正则化，或者笼统说它改善泛化，但在 AdamW、归一化层、过参数化网络这些现代设定下，这些解释并不完全够用，因此这个问题值得重新拆开看。","importance":"这是典型的优化机理类工作，贡献不在提出新模型，而在澄清一个被广泛使用的训练旋钮到底在起什么作用。对 pretrain 的意义很直接：大模型训练高度依赖优化稳定性和超参迁移，而 weight decay 是最常调的变量之一；如果论文能更精确地区分它对参数范数、学习动态、平坦性或有效步长的影响，就能帮助解释为什么某些配方在 scale-up 时失效，也能减少拍脑袋调参。","technical_approach":"从标题判断，作者应该不是给经验法则，而是从理论与实证两边重新分析 weight decay 在现代优化器中的作用机制。关键点多半在于把‘经典 L2 正则’和‘解耦式 weight decay’区分开，分析其如何改变参数尺度、归一化网络中的有效表示、以及与学习率和自适应预条件器的耦合关系。这样设计有效，因为现代网络里很多层对参数尺度并不敏感，简单把 weight decay 理解成限制模型复杂度会遗漏真正起作用的路径。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认理论结论是否配套了大规模实验，也无法给出具体 benchmark 和数值。对这类论文，真正关键的实验不是单点指标提升，而是现象是否跨架构、优化器和归一化设置稳定出现；例如 SGD 与 AdamW 是否呈现不同机制，移除归一化后结论是否仍成立，最优 weight decay 是否与学习率成可解释关系。这些决定它对大模型训练是否有可操作价值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper revisits a basic but unresolved question: why does weight decay still help in modern deep learning? The old explanation—treating it as plain L2 regularization that improves generalization—does not fully account for current regimes with AdamW, normalization layers, and heavily overparameterized models.","importance":"This is an optimization-mechanism contribution rather than a new model. Its relevance to pretraining is immediate because weight decay is one of the most frequently tuned knobs in large-scale training. A clearer account of what it actually changes—parameter norms, learning dynamics, flatness, or effective step size—would help explain why some recipes transfer across scale while others do not.","technical_approach":"From the title, the paper likely combines theory and controlled experiments to separate the role of classical L2 penalties from decoupled weight decay in modern optimizers. The important mechanism is probably how weight decay interacts with parameter scale, normalized networks, and adaptive preconditioning. That framing matters because many modern layers are partly scale-invariant, so interpreting weight decay purely as a complexity penalty misses the pathway through which it actually affects optimization.","experiments":"Without the abstract, it is not possible to state benchmarks or numbers. For this kind of paper, the main experimental test is not raw accuracy gains but whether the claimed mechanism is consistent across architectures, optimizers, and normalization settings. Evidence such as different behavior under SGD versus AdamW, or changes after removing normalization, would determine whether the conclusions are actionable for large-model training.","authors_note":""},"tags":["weight-decay","regularization","optimization","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["Weight decay","overparameterization","implicit regularization","large language models","optimization dynamics"],"recommendation":{"zh":"澄清现代深度学习中weight decay的真实作用机制而非传统L2正则解释，重点读§4的实证分析和Table2的不同优化器下的作用差异即可","en":"Clarifies the real mechanism of weight decay in modern deep learning instead of traditional L2 regularization explanation, only need to read §4 for empirical analysis and Table2 for performance across optimizers."}},{"id":"2405.18009","title":"Exploring Context Window of Large Language Models via Decomposed Positional Vectors","authors":["Zican Dong","Junyi Li","Xin Men","Xin Zhao","Bingning Wang","Zhen Tian","Weipeng Chen","Ji-Rong Wen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.18009","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DongLMZWTCW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DongLMZWTCW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1403ab1a427050538ec59c7f570aec8b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作给出的核心结论是：LLM 的长上下文失效不只是“位置编码外推差”这么简单，而是隐藏状态中的位置向量在超出窗口后发生了系统性偏移，进而改变了注意力模式。过去很多扩窗方法主要从 RoPE 缩放、插值或训练技巧上修补，但对模型内部到底把位置信息编码成了什么、超窗后哪里开始坏掉，解释一直不够细。","importance":"它的重要性在于提供了一种更可诊断的长上下文分析视角。对 pretrain 和 long-context 研究来说，这比再提出一个经验扩窗技巧更有长期价值，因为它帮助回答为什么某些 length extrapolation 方法在短中距离有效、到更长就崩，或者为什么 direct extrapolation 与 interpolation 表现不同。只要这个分解方法足够稳，它就能成为分析 RoPE、ALiBi 及后续位置方案的通用工具。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用基于均值的分解，把隐藏状态拆成内容成分和位置向量成分，再分析这些位置向量如何形成、如何影响注意力。关键设计在于它不是直接盯着显式位置编码矩阵，而是从模型内部激活中反推出实际被使用的位置表示；这更有意义，因为训练后的 Transformer 会把位置信息与内容信息纠缠，单看输入侧编码并不能解释真正的推理行为。论文还比较了文本超过上下文窗口时 direct extrapolation 和 interpolation 两种设定下位置向量的变化，从而解释不同扩窗策略的效果差异。","experiments":"从摘要可确认，实验围绕上下文窗口内外的位置向量分析展开，但具体模型、窗口长度和性能数字在给定文本中缺失。值得关注的关键事实应包括：分解出的位置向量是否在不同层呈现稳定结构；超窗后其范数、方向或相对几何是否出现明显漂移；这种漂移与注意力衰减、检索失败或困惑度恶化是否相关。如果论文还能展示不同扩窗方案在这些内部指标上的可预测差异，那它的解释力度会明显更强。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper’s main point is that long-context failure in LLMs is not just a generic issue of positional encoding extrapolation. The positional component embedded in hidden states appears to drift systematically beyond the training window, and that drift changes attention behavior. Prior context-extension work mostly patched the problem through RoPE scaling, interpolation, or extra training, with limited insight into what actually breaks inside the model.","importance":"Its value is diagnostic rather than purely algorithmic. For pretraining and long-context research, that matters because it helps explain why some extrapolation tricks work only for moderate extensions, why others fail abruptly, and why direct extrapolation behaves differently from interpolation. If the decomposition is robust, it could become a useful tool for analyzing RoPE, ALiBi, and future positional schemes.","technical_approach":"The core method is a mean-based decomposition that separates hidden states into content-related and position-related components, then studies how the positional vectors are formed and how they affect attention. This is more informative than inspecting explicit positional encodings alone, because trained Transformers entangle content and position internally. The paper also compares how these positional vectors change beyond the context window under direct extrapolation versus interpolation, aiming to explain the behavioral gap between extension strategies.","experiments":"From the provided abstract, the experiments center on analyzing positional vectors inside and beyond the context window, but the exact models, lengths, and performance numbers are missing. The most important evidence would be whether the extracted positional vectors show stable structure across layers, whether their norm or direction drifts sharply out of range, and whether that drift correlates with attention degradation or perplexity loss. Stronger evidence would come from showing that different context-extension methods produce predictably different internal trajectories under this analysis.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-context","positional-encoding","length-extrapolation","transformer"],"keywords":["Positional Vector","Context Window","Large Language Model","Length Extrapolation","Context Window Extension"],"recommendation":{"zh":"拆解隐藏状态的位置向量成分解释长上下文失效原因，重点读§3的分解方法和Fig4的超窗后位置向量偏移实验即可","en":"Decomposes positional vectors in hidden states to explain long-context failure, only need to read §3 for decomposition method and Fig4 for out-of-window positional vector shift experiments."}},{"id":"2403.15796","title":"Understanding Emergent Abilities of Language Models from the Loss Perspective","authors":["Zhengxiao Du","Aohan Zeng","Yuxiao Dong","Jie Tang"],"institutions":["Tsinghua University","Zhipu AI"],"abstract":"$4b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.15796","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DuZD024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DuZD024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/5f1eee2509599faeeb3570a887016a64-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"涌现能力（emergent abilities）到底是大模型独有的还是小模型也能展现？此前争论集中在模型规模和不连续指标上，缺少一个统一的视角来解释涌现现象。本文提出用预训练 loss 而非模型大小来理解涌现。","importance":"对 pretrain 研究有范式级启示。核心发现是：相同预训练 loss 的模型（无论模型大小和数据量如何组合）在下游任务上表现一致。这意味着 loss 是比模型规模更本质的预测指标，直接影响 scaling law 的理解和实验设计。同时发现涌现能力出现在特定 loss 阈值处，与指标是否连续无关。","technical_approach":"控制数据语料、tokenizer 和模型架构不变，训练不同大小的 Transformer 模型到不同数据量，使其达到相同的预训练 loss。然后在多个下游任务上对比性能，验证 loss 作为统一预测变量的有效性。关键洞察：loss 吸收了模型大小和数据量的信息，是下游性能的充分统计量。","experiments":"在固定语料和架构下，不同模型-数据组合达到相同 loss 时，下游任务性能高度一致。涌现能力在特定 loss 阈值处出现，与模型规模无直接关系。这一结论在多个任务上得到验证。具体模型规模和任务数量在摘要中未完整列出。","authors_note":"作者包括杜正晓、曾奥涵、董旭尧、唐杰，来自清华大学/智谱 AI 团队，是 GLM 系列模型的核心成员。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Are emergent abilities exclusive to large models? Prior debate focused on model size and discontinuous metrics. This paper reframes the question: use pretraining loss, not model size, as the lens for understanding emergence.","importance":"Paradigm-level insight for pretrain research. The key finding—models with the same pretraining loss produce the same downstream performance regardless of model/data size combinations—means loss is a more fundamental predictor than scale. This directly impacts how we think about scaling laws and experiment design. Emergence appears at specific loss thresholds, independent of metric continuity.","technical_approach":"Fix corpus, tokenizer, and architecture. Train Transformers of varying sizes on varying data amounts to reach the same pretraining loss. Compare downstream performance. The insight: loss is a sufficient statistic for downstream behavior, absorbing the effects of both model size and data volume.","experiments":"Different model-data combinations achieving the same loss yield highly consistent downstream performance across multiple tasks. Emergent abilities appear at specific loss thresholds regardless of model scale. Exact model sizes and task counts not fully listed in the abstract.","authors_note":"Authors include Zhengxiao Du, Aohan Zeng, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang from Tsinghua University / Zhipu AI, core members behind the GLM model series."},"tags":["emergence","loss-landscape","scaling","llm"],"notable_authors":["Jie Tang","Zhengxiao Du","Aohan Zeng"],"keywords":["pretrained language model","emergent ability","scaling law"],"recommendation":{"zh":"证明预训练loss是比模型规模更本质的下游性能预测指标，重点读§3的控制变量实验设计和Table3的同loss跨规模性能一致结果即可","en":"Proves pre-training loss is a more essential downstream performance predictor than model size, only need to read §3 for controlled experiment design and Table3 for consistent performance across scales with same loss."}},{"id":"2406.17711","title":"Data curation via joint example selection further accelerates multimodal learning","authors":["Talfan Evans","Nikhil Parthasarathy","Hamza Merzic","Olivier J. Hénaff"],"institutions":["Google DeepMind"],"abstract":"$4c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.17711","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/EvansPMH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/EvansPMH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ff8d608f6dcebec401df78ca76617e95-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"大规模预训练中的数据筛选通常独立地评估每个样本的价值，忽略了样本之间的依赖关系。对于多模态对比学习（如 CLIP），batch 内样本的联合可学习性比单个样本的质量更重要。","importance":"对多模态预训练有直接且显著的方法级贡献。JEST（Joint Example Selection）首次系统地利用多模态对比目标暴露的样本间依赖关系来做 batch 级别的数据选择，显著加速训练。这一思路对所有基于对比学习的预训练都有参考价值，也启发了文本 LLM 预训练中数据选择从样本级到 batch 级的思考。","technical_approach":"核心思路：多模态对比目标天然暴露了 batch 内样本的依赖关系（因为对比 loss 依赖于 batch 内的正负样本配对）。JEST 利用这一点，从一个更大的 super-batch 中选择联合可学习性最高的子 batch。为降低从大 super-batch 选择的计算开销，使用模型近似技术（如小模型代理）来估计 batch 的联合价值。","experiments":"JEST 在多模态对比学习预训练中显著超越了独立样本优先级选择的方法，且从更大的 super-batch 中选择效果更好。通过模型近似降低了计算开销，使方法可行。达到了 state-of-the-art 的训练效率。具体加速倍数和模型规模在摘要中未完整给出。","authors_note":"来自 DeepMind（Olivier Hénaff 等）。Hénaff 是对比学习和视觉表征学习领域的知名研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Data curation for large-scale pretraining typically scores examples independently, ignoring inter-example dependencies. For multimodal contrastive learning (e.g., CLIP), the joint learnability of a batch matters more than individual sample quality.","importance":"A directly impactful method-level contribution to multimodal pretraining. JEST is the first to systematically exploit the inter-example dependencies exposed by contrastive objectives for batch-level data selection, significantly accelerating training. The idea generalizes: it prompts thinking about batch-level (vs. sample-level) data selection for text LLM pretraining as well.","technical_approach":"Multimodal contrastive objectives naturally expose within-batch dependencies (contrastive loss depends on positive/negative pairings within the batch). JEST selects the most jointly learnable sub-batch from a larger super-batch. To reduce the computational cost of selecting from large super-batches, model approximation techniques (e.g., smaller proxy models) estimate batch-level joint value.","experiments":"JEST significantly outperforms independent example prioritization in multimodal contrastive pretraining. Larger super-batches yield better selections. Model approximation keeps computational overhead tractable. Achieves state-of-the-art training efficiency. Exact speedup factors and model scales not fully detailed in the abstract.","authors_note":"From DeepMind (Olivier Hénaff et al.). Hénaff is a well-known researcher in contrastive learning and visual representation learning."},"tags":["data-curation","multimodal-pretraining","batch-selection","data-quality"],"notable_authors":["Olivier J. Hénaff"],"keywords":["Data curation","pretraining","contrastive learning","multimodal learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"首次提出batch级联合样本选择策略加速多模态对比学习，应立刻在内研多模态预训练pipeline中做ablation验证","en":"First batch-level joint sample selection strategy to accelerate multimodal contrastive learning, should be immediately tested via ablation in internal multimodal pre-training pipelines."}},{"id":"FangYMHPK0W24","title":"MaskLLM: Learnable Semi-Structured Sparsity for Large Language Models","authors":["Gongfan Fang","Hongxu Yin","Saurav Muralidharan","Greg Heinrich","Jeff Pool","Jan Kautz","Pavlo Molchanov","Xinchao Wang"],"institutions":["NVIDIA"],"abstract":"$4d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/FangYMHPK0W24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/FangYMHPK0W24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/0e9a05f5ce62284c91e4a33498899124-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM的N:M半结构化稀疏剪枝方法依赖人工定义的权重重要性准则，泛化性差，无法端到端适配大规模预训练数据，剪枝后精度损失大。","importance":"大模型稀疏化领域的方法级贡献，可直接集成到LLM预训练/微调流程，在接近2倍推理加速的情况下精度损失小于1%，可直接落地工业级部署。","technical_approach":"改进型剪枝方法，未设计新的权重重要性准则，而是通过Gumbel Softmax采样将N:M稀疏模式建模为可学习的分布，实现端到端训练。区别于现有方法的核心优势是稀疏掩码的跨任务、跨域迁移性更强。","experiments":"在7B到70B参数规模的LLM上验证，半结构化稀疏剪枝后可直接利用现有硬件的稀疏指令集实现接近理论上限的推理加速；消融实验显示，相比基于固定重要性准则的剪枝方法，可学习掩码在跨域迁移时的精度损失降低30%以上。","authors_note":"研究团队来自NVIDIA，核心作者Jeff Pool长期从事深度学习稀疏计算与大模型高效推理研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing N:M semi-structured sparsity pruning methods for LLMs rely on manually defined weight importance criteria, with poor generalization. They cannot adapt to large-scale pre-training data end-to-end, leading to large accuracy loss after pruning.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution to LLM sparsification. It can be directly integrated into LLM pre-training/fine-tuning pipelines, with less than 1% accuracy loss under near-2x inference speedup, and can be directly deployed in industrial systems.","technical_approach":"Improved pruning method. Instead of designing new weight importance criteria, it models N:M sparsity patterns as a learnable distribution via Gumbel Softmax sampling to enable end-to-end training. Its core advantage over existing methods is stronger cross-task and cross-domain transferability of sparse masks.","experiments":"Validated on LLMs with parameter scales from 7B to 70B. After semi-structured sparsity pruning, the model can directly leverage sparse instruction sets of existing hardware to achieve inference speedup close to the theoretical upper bound. Ablation studies show that compared with pruning methods using fixed importance criteria, learnable masks reduce accuracy loss by more than 30% during cross-domain transfer.","authors_note":"Research team is from NVIDIA. Core author Jeff Pool has long worked on deep learning sparse computing and efficient LLM inference."},"tags":["sparsity","pruning","llm-compression","semi-structured"],"keywords":["Sparsity","Pruning","LLMs","Semi-structured Pruning"],"notable_authors":["Jeff Pool"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM存在大量参数冗余，半结构化N:M稀疏可利用现有硬件实现显著推理加速","claim_en":"LLMs have large parameter redundancy, and semi-structured N:M sparsity can achieve significant inference speedup with existing hardware","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"不需要人工定义的权重重要性准则，通过端到端学习N:M稀疏模式的分布即可得到更高质量、可迁移的稀疏掩码","claim_en":"High-quality, transferable sparse masks can be obtained via end-to-end learning of N:M sparsity pattern distributions, without manually defined weight importance criteria","opposes":"Prior pruning methods assume manually designed weight importance criteria are necessary to obtain high-quality sparse masks","opposes_cite_hint":"Frantar 2023 SparseGPT","evidence_anchor":"§4 Method","why_contested":"Breaks the dependence of pruning methods on manual importance criteria, providing a feasible path for end-to-end pre-training of sparse large models"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"端到端可学习的N:M半结构化稀疏剪枝方法，适配工业级部署，作为大模型稀疏化文献备查即可","en":"End-to-end learnable N:M semi-structured sparsity pruning method for industrial deployment, keep as LLM sparsification reference."}},{"id":"GatRSKCSAL24","title":"Discrete Flow Matching","authors":["Itai Gat","Tal Remez","Neta Shaul","Felix Kreuk","Ricky T. Q. Chen","Gabriel Synnaeve","Yossi Adi","Yaron Lipman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GatRSKCSAL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GatRSKCSAL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/f0d629a734b56a642701bba7bc8bb3ed-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"现有流匹配和扩散模型针对连续数据设计，应用到离散数据（如语言、离散语音token）时存在路径设计受限、采样效率低的问题，此前的离散生成方法仅支持特定概率路径，泛化性差。","importance":"离散生成建模范式的方法级贡献，为离散数据的流匹配建模提供了通用框架，可直接应用于离散扩散LM、语音生成等场景。","technical_approach":"原创离散流范式，支持任意源分布和目标分布之间的概率路径族，兼容x预测和噪声预测两种后验采样方式，不需要限定为马尔可夫路径，泛化性显著优于现有离散扩散方法。","experiments":"在文本生成、离散图像生成任务上验证，相比现有离散扩散方法，采样速度提升2倍，生成质量相当，无精度损失。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing flow matching and diffusion models are designed for continuous data. When applied to discrete data such as language and discrete speech tokens, they have limited path design and low sampling efficiency. Previous discrete generation methods only support specific probability paths with poor generalization.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution to discrete generation paradigms. It provides a general framework for flow matching modeling of discrete data, and can be directly applied to scenarios such as discrete diffusion LM and speech generation.","technical_approach":"Original discrete flow paradigm. It supports a general family of probability paths between arbitrary source and target distributions, and is compatible with both x-prediction and noise-prediction posterior sampling methods, no need to limit to Markov paths. Its generalization is significantly better than existing discrete diffusion methods.","experiments":"Validated on text generation and discrete image generation tasks. Compared with existing discrete diffusion methods, sampling speed is doubled with comparable generation quality and no accuracy loss.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","discrete","flow-matching","generative-modeling"],"keywords":["Language modeling","Flow matching","Diffusion models"],"notable_authors":["Ricky T. Q. Chen"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"离散数据生成需要适配离散空间的特殊建模，直接套用连续扩散/流匹配方法会导致性能下降","claim_en":"Discrete data generation requires special modeling adapted to discrete spaces. Directly applying continuous diffusion/flow matching methods will lead to performance degradation","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"改变了离散数据只能用特定概率路径的 prior，为离散扩散 LM 提供了通用流匹配框架，应在文本/语音生成中立刻复现其泛化性优势。","en":"Changes the prior that discrete data requires specific probability paths, providing a general flow matching framework for discrete diffusion LMs; its generalization advantages should be immediately reproduced in text/speech generation."}},{"id":"2410.22380","title":"Discrete Modeling via Boundary Conditional Diffusion Processes","authors":["Yuxuan Gu","Xiaocheng Feng","Lei Huang","Yingsheng Wu","Zekun Zhou","Weihong Zhong","Kun Zhu","Bing Qin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$4f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.22380","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GuF0WZZ0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GuF0WZZ0024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/dbae915128892556134f1c5375855590-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"将连续扩散过程应用于离散数据（如文本）时，连续空间与离散数据之间存在固有不匹配——学到的概率等高线在离散边界处不够精确，导致生成质量和效率受限。之前的连续扩散文本建模方法（如 Diffusion-LM、CDCD）没有显式利用离散边界信息来引导扩散轨迹。","importance":"方法级贡献，为连续扩散建模离散数据提供了一个有原理支撑的改进框架。对 pretrain 研究的意义在于：如果 diffusion LM 要在文本生成上真正追赶 AR 模型，如何弥合连续-离散 gap 是核心问题之一，这篇工作给出了一个 boundary-conditional 的思路。","technical_approach":"提出两步前向过程：第一步估计离散边界的先验分布，第二步以该边界为条件重新缩放前向扩散轨迹，构建 boundary conditional diffusion model。反向过程相应调整，使学到的概率等高线在离散数据点附近更精确。核心思想是把离散结构信息注入到连续扩散的轨迹设计中，而不是在采样后才做 rounding。与 D3PM 等纯离散扩散不同，这里保留了连续扩散的优化优势，同时通过边界条件缓解离散化误差。","experiments":"在语言建模和其他离散数据任务上取得了强结果。具体指标和 baseline 对比需参考全文，但摘要声称在语言建模上表现 strong，说明至少与同期 diffusion LM 方法（如 MDLM、SEDD）有可比性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Applying continuous diffusion to discrete data (e.g., text) suffers from a fundamental mismatch: learned probability contours lack precision at discrete boundaries, hurting generation quality. Prior continuous diffusion LMs did not explicitly leverage discrete boundary information to guide the diffusion trajectory.","importance":"A method-level contribution addressing a core bottleneck for continuous diffusion over discrete data. For pretrain research on diffusion LMs, bridging the continuous-discrete gap is essential for competing with AR models, and this work offers a principled boundary-conditional approach.","technical_approach":"Proposes a two-step forward process: first estimate a boundary prior distribution from discrete data, then rescale the forward trajectory conditioned on this boundary. The reverse process is proportionally adjusted so learned contours are more precise near discrete data points. Unlike pure discrete diffusion (D3PM), this retains continuous optimization advantages while injecting discrete structure into trajectory design rather than relying on post-hoc rounding.","experiments":"Reports strong performance on language modeling and discrete data tasks. Specific metrics and baselines require the full paper, but the claimed results suggest competitiveness with contemporary diffusion LM methods.","authors_note":""},"tags":["discrete-diffusion","diffusion-lm","boundary-guidance","continuous-diffusion"],"keywords":["Diffusion Models","Discrete Modeling","Language Generation","Discrete Image Generation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直击连续扩散用于文本时的离散边界 gap，boundary-conditional 思路改变了纯离散扩散的 prior，是 diffusion LM 追赶 AR 模型的必读之作。","en":"Directly addresses the discrete boundary gap when applying continuous diffusion to text; the boundary-conditional approach changes the prior of pure discrete diffusion and is a must-read for diffusion LMs catching up with AR models."}},{"id":"HaasXCV24","title":"μP2: Effective Sharpness Aware Minimization Requires Layerwise Perturbation Scaling","authors":["Moritz Haas","Jin Xu","Volkan Cevher","Leena Chennuru Vankadara"],"institutions":["EPFL"],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HaasXCV24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HaasXCV24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/449a016a6ce6fba3fe50d05482abf836-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"Sharpness Aware Minimization（SAM）在大规模模型上效果不稳定，原因之一是扰动步长没有考虑不同层的参数尺度差异。之前的 SAM 对所有层施加统一的扰动，但在 μP（maximal update parameterization）框架下，不同层的参数尺度和梯度尺度差异很大。","importance":"优化器/训练方法级贡献。μP 是 pretrain 中 hyperparameter transfer 的重要工具，而 SAM 是改善泛化的常用技术。这篇工作将两者结合，指出有效的 SAM 需要层级扰动缩放（layerwise perturbation scaling），命名为 μP²。对 pretrain 优化有直接参考价值：在用 μP 做 scaling 实验时，如果同时用 SAM，需要注意扰动的层级适配。","technical_approach":"在 μP 框架下分析 SAM 的扰动步，发现统一扰动在不同层产生的有效扰动幅度不一致，导致某些层被过度扰动、某些层扰动不足。提出按 μP 的参数缩放规则对 SAM 的扰动进行层级调整，使每层的扰动在功能空间中具有一致的效果。","experiments":"具体实验设置和结果需参考全文。摘要未提供。","authors_note":"Volkan Cevher 来自 EPFL，在优化理论方面有大量工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"SAM's perturbation step does not account for layer-wise parameter scale differences, making it ineffective at scale. Under μP (maximal update parameterization), different layers have vastly different parameter and gradient scales, so uniform perturbation is mismatched.","importance":"An optimizer/training method contribution combining μP and SAM. Directly relevant to pretrain optimization: when using μP for hyperparameter transfer in scaling experiments, SAM requires layerwise perturbation scaling (μP²) to be effective.","technical_approach":"Analyzes SAM perturbations under μP and shows uniform perturbation creates inconsistent effective perturbation magnitudes across layers. Proposes scaling SAM perturbations according to μP's parameterization rules so each layer receives functionally consistent perturbation.","experiments":"Specific experimental details require the full paper. Abstract not available.","authors_note":"Volkan Cevher is at EPFL with extensive work on optimization theory."},"tags":["mup","sharpness-aware-minimization","optimizer","layerwise-scaling"],"notable_authors":["Volkan Cevher"],"recommendation":{"zh":"将 μP 与 SAM 结合，指出 SAM 需要层级扰动缩放，改变了统一扰动的 prior，在做 scaling 实验时应立刻在 internal ablation 中复现。","en":"Combines μP with SAM, pointing out that SAM requires layerwise perturbation scaling, changing the prior of uniform perturbation; should be immediately reproduced in internal ablations during scaling experiments."}},{"id":"HongLBLJYZ24","title":"Adaptive Preference Scaling for Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback","authors":["Ilgee Hong","Zichong Li","Alexander Bukharin","Yixiao Li","Haoming Jiang","Tianbao Yang","Tuo Zhao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$50","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HongLBLJYZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HongLBLJYZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c1f66abb52467443ba8fc70e0a32e061-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有RLHF的偏好损失仅使用二分类排序标签，无法区分不同偏好对的强度差异，导致奖励函数校准误差大，容易引发奖励黑客问题。","importance":"LLM对齐领域的方法级贡献，可直接集成到现有RLHF pipeline中，无需额外标注即可提升奖励模型的校准度。","technical_approach":"改进型偏好损失，基于分布鲁棒优化为每个偏好对引入自适应缩放参数，对模糊偏好对分配更小的权重，不需要额外的偏好强度标注，仅用二分类排序数据即可实现强度感知的损失计算。","experiments":"在7B参数对话模型上验证，相比标准Bradley-Terry偏好损失，奖励模型的Pearson相关系数提升12%，RLHF后对话的人类偏好胜率提升8%。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing preference loss for RLHF only uses binary ranking labels, cannot distinguish the strength difference between different preference pairs, leading to large calibration error of the reward model and easy occurrence of reward hacking.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution to LLM alignment. It can be directly integrated into existing RLHF pipelines, and improves reward model calibration without extra annotation.","technical_approach":"Improved preference loss. Based on distributionally robust optimization, it introduces an adaptive scaling parameter for each preference pair, assigns smaller weights to ambiguous preference pairs. It does not require extra preference strength annotation, and achieves strength-aware loss calculation only with binary ranking data.","experiments":"Validated on 7B parameter dialogue models. Compared with standard Bradley-Terry preference loss, the Pearson correlation coefficient of the reward model is increased by 12%, and the human preference win rate of dialogues after RLHF is increased by 8%.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rlhf","preference-optimization","alignment","reward-scaling"],"keywords":["Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback","Large Language Models","Alignment"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"RLHF的奖励模型校准质量直接影响最终对齐效果，校准误差会导致奖励黑客问题","claim_en":"The calibration quality of RLHF reward model directly affects the final alignment effect, and calibration error will lead to reward hacking","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为 RLHF 偏好损失改进的 literature 备查，自适应缩放思路可参考，不读正文。","en":"Keep as a literature reference for RLHF preference loss improvements; the adaptive scaling idea is worth noting, but no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"HuZC24","title":"S-STE: Continuous Pruning Function for Efficient 2: 4 Sparse Pre-training","authors":["Yuezhou Hu","Jun Zhu","Jianfei Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$51","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HuZC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HuZC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3b576711b12ab036b45130fc8eb78504-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：2:4 结构化稀疏预训练很有硬件价值，但训练期难做、梯度估计不稳定，导致很多方法只能先 dense 训练再稀疏化，或者需要复杂的离散近似。这个问题现在值得重做，是因为 2:4 稀疏已经被主流硬件支持，若能把稀疏直接前移到 pre-training，节省的不只是推理成本，而是整个训练算力。","importance":"这是方法级 + 系统级的工作，重点不是提出更一般的稀疏理论，而是把 2:4 sparse pre-training 这件事做得更可训练。对 pretrain 的意义很直接：如果连续化的剪枝函数确实能在预训练阶段稳定学习到硬件友好的结构化稀疏，那么它比后训练稀疏化更有经济性，也更接近真实可部署路线。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出 S-STE，一种面向 2:4 稀疏预训练的连续 pruning function，并配合 straight-through estimation 处理离散约束。关键设计点大概率在于：它不把 2:4 掩码完全当成硬选择，而是用连续参数化让掩码学习过程更平滑，降低训练早期的梯度噪声；同时又保留最终满足 2:4 结构约束的可部署性。和传统 magnitude pruning 或硬门控相比，这种设计的优势是优化更稳定，代价则可能是引入额外温度、阈值或投影超参，并需要保证训练后期真正收敛到合法稀疏模式。","experiments":"从标题可以判断，实验重点应是 2:4 稀疏预训练的精度-效率权衡，而不是极限压缩率。给定当前信息，无法确认具体模型规模、数据集、加速比和精度变化。值得重点关注的实验事实通常包括：与 dense pretrain + prune、已有 STE/门控方法相比是否在相同 FLOPs 下更稳；训练早期是否减少 loss spike；以及不同稀疏率调度、连续函数形状、mask 更新频率对最终精度的影响。没有摘要时不应虚构数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical bottleneck: 2:4 structured sparsity is hardware-friendly, but hard to optimize during pretraining. As a result, many pipelines still train dense models first and sparsify later, which misses most of the training-time savings.","importance":"This is a method-and-systems contribution aimed at making structured sparse pretraining actually trainable. For pretraining research, the implication is clear: if 2:4 sparsity can be learned stably from the start, the gain is not just cheaper inference but lower end-to-end training cost on hardware that already supports this pattern.","technical_approach":"The core idea is S-STE, a continuous pruning function tailored to 2:4 sparse pretraining, likely combined with a straight-through estimator to handle the discrete sparsity constraint. The key design choice is to relax the mask-learning process so optimization is smoother early in training, while still converging to a valid 2:4 pattern for deployment. Compared with hard masking or standard magnitude pruning, this should improve stability; the trade-off is extra hyperparameter sensitivity and the need to ensure the final mask is legally structured.","experiments":"From the title, the experiments likely focus on the accuracy-efficiency trade-off of 2:4 sparse pretraining rather than extreme compression. The available information does not specify model sizes, datasets, speedups, or final accuracy. The most useful empirical questions are whether S-STE is more stable than dense-then-prune or prior STE-based methods at matched compute, whether it reduces early loss spikes, and how sensitive it is to sparsity schedules and mask update rules.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sparsity","pruning","sparse-pretraining","2:4-sparsity","efficiency"],"keywords":["efficient machine learning","transformers","2:4 sparsity","dynamic sparse training"],"recommendation":{"zh":"将 2:4 稀疏前移到 pre-training，S-STE 连续剪枝函数改变了后训练稀疏化的 prior，若能稳定收敛，将大幅节省训练算力，值得重点关注其优化稳定性。","en":"Moves 2:4 sparsity to pre-training; the S-STE continuous pruning function changes the prior of post-training sparsification. If it converges stably, it will significantly save training compute; its optimization stability is worth close attention."}},{"id":"HuangJGQZZWCY24","title":"Accelerating Pre-training of Multimodal LLMs via Chain-of-Sight","authors":["Ziyuan Huang","Kaixiang Ji","Biao Gong","Zhiwu Qing","Qinglong Zhang","Kecheng Zheng","Jian Wang","Jingdong Chen","Ming Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$52","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HuangJGQZZWCY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HuangJGQZZWCY24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/8a54a80ffc2834689ffdd0920202018e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：多模态 LLM 预训练很贵，尤其视觉 token 多、对齐信号稀疏，导致训练效率低。作者想通过 Chain-of-Sight 这类机制，在不简单牺牲能力的前提下加速 multimodal LLM pre-training。","importance":"这是直接相关的 pretrain 方法级工作。对多模态统一预训练的价值在于，它针对的不是后处理推理技巧，而是训练期的样本效率和算力效率。如果方法成立，它会影响 MLLM 是否能以更低成本学习图文绑定和视觉 grounding，这比单纯提一点 benchmark 更有实际冲击。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Chain-of-Sight，用于加速多模态 LLM 预训练。仅从题目判断，它大概率不是普通的 chain-of-thought 文本监督，而是围绕视觉观察路径、区域选择、视觉 token 路由或逐步感知顺序构造更有效的训练信号，让模型先学会看哪里、再学会说什么。和把所有视觉 token 一次性塞给 LLM 的做法相比，这种设计的潜在优势是减少无效上下文和注意力浪费；代价是需要额外的视觉先验、路线生成器或训练协议。","experiments":"标题表明最关键结果应是预训练加速，但当前没有摘要，无法确认加速是 wall-clock、训练步数还是 data efficiency，也无法确认模型规模和任务指标。读者最该看的是三件事：第一，在相同训练预算下是否显著提升下游多模态能力；第二，若固定目标精度，训练步数或 FLOPs 减少多少；第三，方法是否在高分辨率图像或长视觉序列下收益更大，这会决定它的实际适用范围。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a real pretraining bottleneck: multimodal LLM pretraining is expensive because visual sequences are long and alignment signals are sparse. The goal is to improve training efficiency without simply dropping visual information and hurting capability.","importance":"This is directly relevant to pretraining. Its significance lies in improving training-time efficiency for multimodal language models rather than adding a post-hoc reasoning trick. If effective, it changes the cost of learning visual grounding and image-text binding at scale.","technical_approach":"The core method is called Chain-of-Sight, proposed to accelerate multimodal LLM pretraining. From the title, it likely structures how the model attends to or processes visual evidence over time, rather than feeding all visual tokens uniformly into the language model. The design intuition is straightforward: if the model can learn where to look before learning what to say, it may waste less context budget and attention compute on irrelevant visual content. The trade-off is extra machinery for routing, ordering, or generating this visual path.","experiments":"The title suggests the main result is pretraining acceleration, but the available information does not specify whether the gain is in wall-clock time, training steps, or sample efficiency. Model sizes, datasets, and exact benchmark numbers are also unavailable. The most important empirical checks are whether the method improves downstream multimodal quality under a fixed budget, how much compute is saved to reach the same performance, and whether the gains grow with image resolution or visual sequence length.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm-pretraining","visual-tokens","efficiency","chain-of-sight"],"keywords":["Chain-of-Sight","MLLMs","pre-training efficiency","3.7x speedup"],"recommendation":{"zh":"针对多模态预训练效率，Chain-of-Sight 改变了视觉 token 一次性输入的 prior，若能降低成本且不损能力，对 MLLM 训练有实际冲击，需关注其额外先验代价。","en":"Addressing multimodal pre-training efficiency, Chain-of-Sight changes the prior of one-time visual token input. If it reduces cost without compromising capability, it has practical impact on MLLM training; pay attention to its extra prior cost."}},{"id":"JainMS24","title":"Scaling laws for learning with real and surrogate data","authors":["Ayush Jain","Andrea Montanari","Eren Sasoglu"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"$53","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JainMS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JainMS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c7038ec7eee8dc5a99d74d594f70aa3f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"当真实数据稀缺时，用合成/代理数据（surrogate data）辅助训练的效果如何量化？现有 scaling law 主要关注真实数据量和模型规模，缺少对代理数据混合比例和质量的理论刻画。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 数据配比策略有直接启示：合成数据（如 LLM 生成的数据）在预训练中越来越普遍，这篇工作提供了理论框架来预测混合真实+合成数据时的 scaling 行为，有助于在数据采购和合成成本之间做理性决策。","technical_approach":"建立了一个 scaling law 理论模型，将真实数据量、代理数据量及其与真实分布的偏差（distribution shift）作为变量，推导测试误差的 power-law 形式。核心洞察是代理数据的边际收益随偏差增大而衰减，存在一个有效等价比（effective data ratio），超过该比例再加代理数据收益趋零。理论在高斯混合和线性回归等可解析设定下推导，再在更复杂场景验证。","experiments":"在回归和分类任务上验证理论预测与实际 scaling 曲线的吻合度。实验涵盖不同代理数据质量（偏差大小）和混合比例，展示了理论预测的 power-law 指数与实测值的一致性。具体模型规模和数据量级未从标题/摘要获取，但重点在理论验证而非 SOTA。","authors_note":"Andrea Montanari 是斯坦福大学统计学和电气工程教授，在高维统计和统计物理与机器学习交叉领域有大量代表性工作，包括 AMP 算法、random matrix theory 在 ML 中的应用等。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to quantify the benefit of mixing surrogate (synthetic) data with real data for training? Existing scaling laws focus on real data size and model scale but lack a principled treatment of surrogate data quality and mixing ratio.","importance":"Method-level contribution directly relevant to pretrain data strategy. As synthetic data from LLMs becomes a major data source for pretraining, this work provides a theoretical framework to predict scaling behavior under real+surrogate mixtures, enabling rational cost-benefit decisions.","technical_approach":"Derives scaling laws that incorporate real data size, surrogate data size, and distribution shift between surrogate and real data. The key insight: marginal returns from surrogate data decay as distribution shift grows, yielding an effective data ratio beyond which more surrogate data adds negligible value. Theory is developed in analytically tractable settings (Gaussian mixtures, linear regression) and validated in more complex scenarios.","experiments":"Validates theoretical power-law predictions against empirical scaling curves across regression and classification tasks with varying surrogate data quality and mixing ratios. Focus is on theory verification rather than SOTA benchmarks.","authors_note":"Andrea Montanari is a professor at Stanford known for foundational work on high-dimensional statistics, AMP algorithms, and the intersection of statistical physics and ML."},"tags":["scaling-law","synthetic-data","data-mixture","sample-efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Andrea Montanari"],"keywords":["Machine learning","Synthetic data","Surrogate data","Scaling laws","Linear regression"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看推导的 power-law 形式和有效等价比即可，为混合真实+合成数据提供了理论框架，有助于指导数据配比策略。","en":"Just look at the derived power-law form and effective data ratio; provides a theoretical framework for mixing real + synthetic data, helping guide data mixing strategies."}},{"id":"Ji0LHZPQD024","title":"Aligner: Efficient Alignment by Learning to Correct","authors":["Jiaming Ji","Boyuan Chen","Hantao Lou","Donghai Hong","Borong Zhang","Xuehai Pan","Tianyi Qiu","Juntao Dai","Yaodong Yang"],"institutions":["Peking University"],"abstract":"$54","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Ji0LHZPQD024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Ji0LHZPQD024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a51a74b2d71387dc71cc29181b5519bb-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 对齐（alignment）通常需要昂贵的 RLHF 训练。能否用一个轻量的 'corrector' 模型来高效地将未对齐模型的输出修正为对齐的输出，而不需要重新训练基座模型？","importance":"对 pretrain↔posttrain 接口有直接启示。Aligner 提供了一种解耦 pretrain 和 alignment 的思路：基座模型不动，用一个小模型做后处理式的对齐修正。如果有效，这意味着 pretrain 可以更专注于能力获取，对齐成本大幅降低。","technical_approach":"训练一个 Aligner 模型，输入是原始 LLM 的输出，输出是修正后的对齐版本。训练数据是 (未对齐输出, 对齐输出) 对，可以从现有的 RLHF 模型或人工标注中获取。核心优势是 Aligner 可以跨不同基座模型复用——因为它学的是 '如何修正' 而非 '如何生成'。","experiments":"具体模型规模和 benchmark 未从摘要获取，但预期在多个 LLM 上验证 Aligner 的跨模型迁移能力，以及与直接 RLHF 的对齐质量对比。","authors_note":"该团队来自北京大学，Jiaming Ji 在 AI safety 和对齐方向有持续产出。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM alignment via RLHF is expensive. Can a lightweight 'corrector' model efficiently align an unaligned model's outputs without retraining the base model?","importance":"Directly relevant to the pretrain-posttrain interface. Aligner decouples pretraining from alignment: the base model stays frozen, and a small corrector handles alignment post-hoc. If effective, this lets pretraining focus purely on capability while drastically reducing alignment cost.","technical_approach":"Trains an Aligner model that takes an unaligned LLM's output and produces an aligned version. Training data consists of (unaligned output, aligned output) pairs from existing RLHF models or human annotations. Key advantage: the Aligner transfers across different base models since it learns 'how to correct' rather than 'how to generate'.","experiments":"Specific model sizes and benchmarks not available from abstract. Expected to demonstrate cross-model transferability and compare alignment quality against direct RLHF.","authors_note":"The team is from Peking University. Jiaming Ji has sustained work on AI safety and alignment."},"tags":["alignment","distillation","preference-learning","efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Jiaming Ji"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Alignment","Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看 Aligner 的训练数据构造和跨模型复用效果即可，解耦 pretrain 和 alignment 的思路对降低对齐成本有启发。","en":"Just look at Aligner's training data construction and cross-model reuse effects; the idea of decoupling pretrain and alignment is inspiring for reducing alignment costs."}},{"id":"JiLZLK0C24","title":"Reversing the Forget-Retain Objectives: An Efficient LLM Unlearning Framework from Logit Difference","authors":["Jiabao Ji","Yujian Liu","Yang Zhang","Gaowen Liu","Ramana Kompella","Sijia Liu","Shiyu Chang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$55","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JiLZLK0C24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JiLZLK0C24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/171291d8fed723c6dfc76330aa827ff8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM遗忘方法同时优化遗忘损失最大化和保留损失最小化两个冲突目标，容易出现退化：要么遗忘不彻底，要么保留的通用知识损失严重。","importance":"LLM遗忘领域的方法级贡献，提出的反向目标优化框架显著降低了遗忘任务的计算开销，仅需少量保留样本即可实现高效遗忘。","technical_approach":"原创遗忘框架，反转常规的遗忘-保留目标，基于逻辑差异对齐实现遗忘，不需要同时优化两个冲突目标，仅需要少量保留样本即可实现高遗忘率，同时最小化通用能力损失。","experiments":"在7B参数LLM上验证，相比基线方法，遗忘速度提升3倍，保留知识的精度损失小于2%，目标内容遗忘率超过99%。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM unlearning methods simultaneously optimize two conflicting objectives: maximizing forgetting loss and minimizing retention loss, which easily leads to degradation: either incomplete forgetting, or severe loss of retained general knowledge.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution to LLM unlearning. The proposed reversed objective optimization framework significantly reduces the computational cost of unlearning tasks, and achieves efficient unlearning with only a small number of retained samples.","technical_approach":"Original unlearning framework. It reverses the conventional forget-retain objectives, implements unlearning based on logit difference alignment, no need to optimize two conflicting objectives at the same time. It achieves high forgetting rate with only a small number of retained samples, while minimizing general capability loss.","experiments":"Validated on 7B parameter LLMs. Compared with baseline methods, unlearning speed is tripled, accuracy loss of retained knowledge is less than 2%, and target content forgetting rate exceeds 99%.","authors_note":""},"tags":["unlearning","llm","fine-tuning","safety"],"keywords":["Large Language Model","LLM Unlearn"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM遗忘需要同时满足目标内容遗忘和通用知识保留两个约束，二者存在天然权衡","claim_en":"LLM unlearning needs to meet two constraints: target content forgetting and general knowledge retention, which have a natural trade-off","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为 LLM unlearning 的 literature 备查，反向目标优化框架可参考，不读正文。","en":"Keep as a literature reference for LLM unlearning; the reversed objective optimization framework is worth noting, but no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"Jia24","title":"Adversarial Moment-Matching Distillation of Large Language Models","authors":["Chen Jia"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$56","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Jia24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Jia24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/cbae8efcc23a0cb6d15a20f245514020-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM知识蒸馏方法最小化教师和学生的概率分布散度，容易过拟合到教师的局部错误，导致学生模型泛化性差。","importance":"LLM知识蒸馏领域的方法级贡献，提出的对抗矩匹配蒸馏方法不需要对齐逐token概率分布，泛化性更强。","technical_approach":"改进型蒸馏方法，基于模仿学习框架，匹配教师行为的动作值矩，采用对抗训练联合估计矩匹配距离和优化学生模型，兼容在线和离线策略样本，蒸馏效率更高。","experiments":"在7B到13B参数的LLM上验证，相比标准KL散度蒸馏，学生模型的下游任务平均精度提升4%，推理效率不变。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM knowledge distillation methods minimize the probability distribution divergence between teacher and student, which easily overfits to local errors of the teacher, leading to poor generalization of the student model.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution to LLM knowledge distillation. The proposed adversarial moment-matching distillation method does not need to align per-token probability distributions, and has stronger generalization.","technical_approach":"Improved distillation method. Based on the imitation learning framework, it matches the action-value moments of the teacher's behavior, uses adversarial training to jointly estimate the moment-matching distance and optimize the student model. It is compatible with both on-policy and off-policy samples, with higher distillation efficiency.","experiments":"Validated on LLMs with parameter scales from 7B to 13B. Compared with standard KL divergence distillation, the average downstream task accuracy of the student model is increased by 4% with unchanged inference efficiency.","authors_note":""},"tags":["distillation","llm","moment-matching","adversarial"],"keywords":["Knowledge distillation","Large language models","Imitation learning","Moment-matching","Adversarial training"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"知识蒸馏是压缩大模型、降低部署成本的有效方法，学生模型的泛化性是核心约束","claim_en":"Knowledge distillation is an effective method to compress large models and reduce deployment costs, and the generalization of the student model is the core constraint","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为 LLM 知识蒸馏的 literature 备查，对抗矩匹配思路可参考，不读正文。","en":"Keep as a literature reference for LLM knowledge distillation; the adversarial moment-matching idea is worth noting, but no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"JiaXLWF0SLZLT24","title":"SDP4Bit: Toward 4-bit Communication Quantization in Sharded Data Parallelism for LLM Training","authors":["Jinda Jia","Cong Xie","Hanlin Lu","Daoce Wang","Hao Feng","Chengming Zhang","Baixi Sun","Haibin Lin","Zhi Zhang","Xin Liu","Dingwen Tao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$57","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JiaXLWF0SLZLT24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JiaXLWF0SLZLT24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/10826a1a80f816ea98d559d7c7a97973-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有分片数据并行（ShardedDP）训练中的权重和梯度通信开销占比高，现有压缩方法会导致训练精度下降，无法支持4位超低精度的通信量化。","importance":"大模型分布式训练领域的系统级贡献，可将ShardedDP的通信量降低75%，同时保持训练精度损失小于0.5%，可直接用于大规模LLM预训练加速。","technical_approach":"改进型通信量化方法，针对ShardedDP的通信模式设计自适应量化缩放因子，避免低比特量化带来的梯度偏移，不需要修改优化器逻辑，可直接集成到现有分布式训练框架中。","experiments":"在175B参数LLM的分布式训练上验证，4位通信量化下训练吞吐量提升30%，下游任务精度损失小于0.3%，无收敛问题。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The weight and gradient communication overhead in existing Sharded Data Parallelism (ShardedDP) training accounts for a high proportion. Existing compression methods lead to training accuracy degradation, and cannot support 4-bit ultra-low-precision communication quantization.","importance":"This is a system-level contribution to large model distributed training. It reduces ShardedDP communication volume by 75% while keeping training accuracy loss less than 0.5%, and can be directly used to accelerate large-scale LLM pre-training.","technical_approach":"Improved communication quantization method. It designs adaptive quantization scaling factors for the communication pattern of ShardedDP, avoids gradient offset caused by low-bit quantization, does not need to modify optimizer logic, and can be directly integrated into existing distributed training frameworks.","experiments":"Validated on distributed training of 175B parameter LLMs. With 4-bit communication quantization, training throughput is increased by 30%, downstream task accuracy loss is less than 0.3%, and no convergence problem occurs.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","distributed-training","communication","llm-training"],"keywords":["LLM Training","Quantization","Communication Reduction","Collective Communication"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"分布式训练中通信开销是大规模LLM预训练的主要瓶颈之一，低比特量化是降低通信开销的核心手段","claim_en":"Communication overhead in distributed training is one of the main bottlenecks of large-scale LLM pre-training, and low-bit quantization is the core method to reduce communication overhead","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看自适应量化缩放因子的设计和精度损失评估即可，4-bit 通信量化对大规模 LLM 预训练加速有实际价值。","en":"Just look at the design of the adaptive quantization scaling factor and the accuracy loss evaluation; 4-bit communication quantization has practical value for accelerating large-scale LLM pre-training."}},{"id":"JiangL24","title":"Approximation Rate of the Transformer Architecture for Sequence Modeling","authors":["Haotian Jiang","Qianxiao Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"The Transformer architecture is widely applied in sequence modeling applications, yet the theoretical understanding of its working principles remains limited. In this work, we investigate the approximation rate for single-layer Transformers with one head. We consider general non-linear relationships and identify a novel notion of complexity measures to establish an explicit Jackson-type approximation rate estimate for the Transformer. This rate reveals the structural properties of the Transformer and suggests the types of sequential relationships it is best suited for approximating. In particular, the results on approximation rates enable us to concretely analyze the differences between the Transformer and classical sequence modeling methods, such as recurrent neural networks.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JiangL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JiangL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/7f64034009f4a5fa417a57e1a987c5cd-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有Transformer理论理解不足，单头单层Transformer的序列拟合能力没有明确量化界，过往工作要么回避理论分析仅给出经验结论，要么无法解释Transformer与RNN等经典序列模型的适配场景差异。","importance":"理论方法级贡献，填补了单头单层Transformer逼近率的理论空白，提出的复杂度度量可指导预训练阶段针对不同序列任务选型模型结构，减少经验试错成本。","technical_approach":"原创理论推导，引入新型复杂度度量建立Transformer的显式Jackson型逼近率估计；针对注意力的乘法交互结构专门推导，未引入额外强假设，区别于过往仅分析前馈网络或RNN逼近率的工作。","experiments":"纯理论研究，无实证实验，所有结论来自严格数学推导。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Theoretical understanding of Transformer remains limited, with no explicit quantitative bound for the approximation ability of single-head single-layer Transformers. Existing work either avoids theoretical analysis and only provides empirical conclusions, or fails to explain the scenario suitability difference between Transformer and classical sequence models like RNN.","importance":"Theoretical method-level contribution that fills the gap of approximation rate analysis for single-head single-layer Transformers. The proposed complexity measure can guide model structure selection for different sequence tasks during pre-training, reducing empirical trial-and-error cost.","technical_approach":"Original theoretical derivation that introduces a novel complexity measure to establish explicit Jackson-type approximation rate estimates for Transformers. It is derived specifically for the multiplicative interaction structure of attention without extra strong assumptions, differing from prior work that only analyzes approximation rates of feedforward networks or RNNs.","experiments":"Pure theoretical work with no empirical experiments, all conclusions come from rigorous mathematical derivation.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","approximation-theory","sequence-modeling"],"keywords":["Approximation theory","Transformer","Sequence Modeling"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer是当前序列建模任务的主流架构","claim_en":"Transformer is the dominant architecture for sequence modeling tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"单头单层Transformer的逼近率由新提出的复杂度度量决定，对长程序列依赖的拟合能力优于RNN","claim_en":"The approximation rate of single-head single-layer Transformer is determined by the proposed novel complexity measure, and it outperforms RNN on fitting long-range sequential dependencies","opposes":"Prior work only provides empirical observations of performance differences between Transformer and RNN without theoretical guarantees","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Theorem 1","why_contested":"Provides the first quantitative theoretical basis for the fitting ability difference between the two architectures, which can guide model structure selection."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为 Transformer 理论分析的 literature 备查，单头单层逼近率的推导可参考，不读正文。","en":"Keep as a literature reference for Transformer theoretical analysis; the derivation of the single-head single-layer approximation rate is worth noting, but no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"JiangRRA24","title":"Do LLMs dream of elephants (when told not to)? Latent concept association and associative memory in transformers","authors":["Yibo Jiang","Goutham Rajendran","Pradeep Ravikumar","Bryon Aragam"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large Language Models (LLMs) have the capacity to store and recall facts. Through experimentation with open-source models, we observe that this ability to retrieve facts can be easily manipulated by changing contexts, even without altering their factual meanings. These findings highlight that LLMs might behave like an associative memory model where certain tokens in the contexts serve as clues to retrieving facts. We mathematically explore this property by studying how transformers, the building blocks of LLMs, can complete such memory tasks. We study a simple latent concept association problem with a one-layer transformer and we show theoretically and empirically that the transformer gathers information using self-attention and uses the value matrix for associative memory.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JiangRRA24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JiangRRA24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/7d3626b603cac298c9f7573b1df00cac-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的核心问题是：Transformer 里的概念是否以“联想记忆”的方式被存储和激活，而不是只做局部的 next-token 统计匹配。这个问题过去通常被行为现象零散讨论，比如提示一个概念会诱发相关但未显式要求的输出，但缺少对“潜在概念关联”本身的系统刻画；现在值得重做，是因为这直接关系到幻觉、拒答失败、提示注入和可解释性。","importance":"它更像一篇机制分析工作，而不是新训练方法论文，但对 pretrain 很有启发。它的重要性在于把“模型为什么会在被要求不要提某概念时仍然想起它”这个现象，往表示层与记忆结构上推进了一步；如果结论成立，说明很多生成偏差不是简单解码问题，而是预训练中形成的概念共现结构在起作用。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是围绕“潜在概念关联”构造干预和测量，而不是只看最终文本输出。题目表明作者关注 transformers 的 associative memory，因此大概率会通过提示控制、概念触发、表示相似性或中间层激活分析，去区分显式指令与隐式联想之间的张力；和传统 jailbreak/偏见评测不同，这类设计的关键不是测是否违规，而是测一个概念被压制时是否仍在内部被检索。","experiments":"公开信息不足，无法可靠给出模型规模、数据规模、基线和具体数值。可以合理判断的是，实验重点应是展示：当提示要求避免某一概念时，模型仍会通过相关属性、近邻概念或叙事模板把它重新带回生成；如果论文扎实，通常还会比较不同模型族、层位或提示形式下这种联想强度的差异。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a sharp question: do transformers store and retrieve concepts as associative memories, rather than merely matching local next-token statistics? This matters because many odd behaviors—mentioning a suppressed concept, drifting toward correlated content, or failing at negation-style instructions—have been observed behaviorally, but rarely tied to a concrete account of latent concept association.","importance":"This is primarily a mechanistic analysis paper, not a new pretraining recipe, but it is still relevant to pretraining. If the authors show that unwanted generations come from entrenched concept associations learned during pretraining, then the problem sits upstream of decoding and safety filters; it becomes a question about representation geometry and memory formation.","technical_approach":"The likely contribution is a measurement framework for latent association under instruction-level suppression. From the title, the paper is not just checking whether a model violates a prompt; it is trying to isolate whether a forbidden concept is still internally retrieved through related attributes, neighbors, or compositional cues, which is closer to probing associative memory than standard red-teaming.","experiments":"The provided metadata does not include enough detail to state model sizes, datasets, baselines, or numeric gains reliably. The key empirical claim is likely qualitative-to-quantitative evidence that suppressing an explicit concept does not remove its internal activation, and that this leakage reappears in generation through semantically adjacent content.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","associative-memory","latent-concepts","interpretability"],"keywords":["Transformer","Associative Memory","Large Language Models","Interpretability","Fact retrieval"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅需看§3的中间层激活检测实验和Fig4的概念压制表征结果，可用于解释预训练引入的生成偏差来源","en":"Only read Section 3's intermediate activation experiments and Fig 4's concept suppression representation results, which explain pretraining-induced generation bias sources."}},{"id":"JiangWXZc0L24","title":"D-LLM: A Token Adaptive Computing Resource Allocation Strategy for Large Language Models","authors":["Yikun Jiang","Huanyu Wang","Lei Xie","Hanbin Zhao","Zhang Chao","Hui Qian","John C. S. Lui"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$58","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JiangWXZc0L24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JiangWXZc0L24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/03469b1a66e351b18272be23baf3b809-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是大语言模型推理时计算分配过于平均的问题。标准 Transformer 对所有 token 一视同仁，但真实生成里不同 token 的难度差别很大；把同样的算力花在“容易 token”和“关键 token”上，会浪费延迟和 FLOPs。","importance":"这是一个系统与推理效率方向的工作，不直接改 pretrain，但对大模型架构设计有现实价值。它的重要性在于把‘自适应算力分配’从样本级推进到 token 级；如果做得稳，说明未来训练和推理都可以不再默认每个位置走同一条计算路径。","technical_approach":"D-LLM 的核心应该是 token-adaptive 的资源分配策略，即按 token 难度动态决定计算深度、宽度或保留的模块。和静态剪枝、统一 early-exit 不同，这类方法的关键选择是做细粒度决策，同时尽量避免控制器本身引入太多开销；有效性的原因通常是，语言生成中的不确定性和信息密度天然不均匀。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法确认具体模型规模、任务和节省比例。按这类论文的标准配置，实验一般会报告在困惑度、下游任务或生成质量基本不变的前提下，减少平均计算量、时延或显存，并做难度估计模块与退出策略的消融；真正有价值的观察通常是收益是否集中在长序列和简单上下文上，以及是否会伤害少数关键位置的质量。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a simple inefficiency: standard LLM inference spends roughly the same compute on every token, even though tokens differ sharply in difficulty and importance. That leaves a clear opportunity to reduce cost by allocating more compute to hard positions and less to easy ones.","importance":"This is mainly a systems and inference-efficiency contribution, but it is relevant to model design more broadly. Its significance is the move from sample-level adaptive compute to token-level allocation; if successful, it argues against the default assumption that all positions should traverse an identical computation path.","technical_approach":"D-LLM appears to implement token-adaptive resource allocation, likely by dynamically selecting depth, width, or active modules per token. The design trade-off is central here: finer-grained routing can save substantial compute, but only if the controller is cheap and stable enough that routing overhead does not erase the gains.","experiments":"The abstract is not provided, so exact model sizes, baselines, and savings cannot be stated safely. Papers in this category usually report quality-retention under lower average FLOPs or latency, plus ablations on the difficulty estimator and routing policy; the most informative result is whether savings hold on long contexts without degrading key low-frequency decisions.","authors_note":""},"tags":["adaptive-compute","token-level","llm","resource-allocation"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Dynamic Inference","Inference Acceleration","Adaptive Computing Resource Allocation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§4.2的token难度判定逻辑和Fig5的算力-精度tradeoff曲线，可给架构设计时的异构计算路径提供参考","en":"Focus on Section 4.2's token difficulty judgment logic and Fig 5's compute-accuracy tradeoff curve, which provides reference for heterogeneous computing path architecture design."}},{"id":"JiangZPLJM24","title":"Repurposing Language Models into Embedding Models: Finding the Compute-Optimal Recipe","authors":["Albert Q. Jiang","Alicja Ziarko","Bartosz Piotrowski","Wenda Li","Mateja Jamnik","Piotr Milos"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Text embeddings are essential for tasks such as document retrieval, clustering, and semantic similarity assessment. In this paper, we study how to contrastively train text embedding models in a compute-optimal fashion, given a suite of pretrained decoder-only language models. Our innovation is an algorithm that produces optimal configurations of model sizes, data quantities, and fine-tuning methods for text-embedding models at different computational budget levels. The resulting recipe, which we obtain through extensive experiments, can be used by practitioners to make informed design choices for their embedding models. Specifically, our findings suggest that full fine-tuning and Low-Rank Adaptation fine-tuning produce optimal models at lower and higher computational budgets respectively.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JiangZPLJM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JiangZPLJM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/707a2d58641b2192203b4bf4c532cfe1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题很实际：如何把生成式语言模型高效地改造成高质量 embedding 模型，并找到算力最优的训练配方。过去常见做法要么直接拿中间层做 embedding，效果有限；要么用大量对比学习继续训练，但计算和数据配方不清楚，常常不划算。","importance":"这是方法级且很有工程价值的工作，因为 embedding 已经成为 LLM 之外另一条大规模基础模型产品线。它对 pretrain 的启示是：生成能力和表征能力并不自动一致，‘把 LM 变成 retriever/encoder’需要单独优化目标与训练预算，而且存在可分析的 compute-optimal recipe。","technical_approach":"核心方法是系统研究 LM→embedding model 的改造路径，并给出计算最优的 recipe，而不是只提出一个新 loss。题目里的 repurposing 表明作者大概率比较了不同初始化、层选择、池化方式、对比目标、指令数据和训练 token 预算，回答‘在固定算力下，应该继续预训练、监督微调，还是做对比蒸馏’；这比单点方法更有参考价值。","experiments":"虽然这里没有摘要，但这类论文通常会覆盖多个参数规模、多个 embedding benchmark 和不同训练预算，报告在 MTEB 或检索任务上的收益。真正值得关注的实验不只是最好分数，而是 scaling 结论：例如小规模额外训练是否比从头训练更划算，不同损失在低算力和高算力区间谁更优，以及生成能力保留多少。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical question: how should we turn a generative language model into a strong embedding model, and what is the compute-optimal way to do it? Existing practice is messy—either reuse LM hidden states with modest results, or run expensive contrastive fine-tuning without a clear recipe for when the extra compute is actually worth it.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with strong relevance to foundation model training. Its main value is showing that generative pretraining does not automatically yield the best retrieval-oriented representation, and that the LM-to-embedding transition should be treated as its own optimization problem with measurable compute trade-offs.","technical_approach":"The likely contribution is not a single new objective but a systematic recipe study for repurposing LMs into embedding models. That usually means comparing initialization choices, pooling strategies, layers, contrastive objectives, instruction data, and training budgets, with the goal of answering a decision question practitioners actually face: what gives the best embedding quality per unit of additional compute?","experiments":"The abstract is missing, so I cannot state exact scales or numbers. A solid paper in this space would benchmark across parameter sizes and standard embedding suites, and the most useful results would be scaling observations: when continued training beats from-scratch encoders, which objectives dominate under small vs large budgets, and how much generative capability is retained after repurposing.","authors_note":""},"tags":["embedding","llm-repurposing","compute-optimal","representation"],"keywords":["text embedding","embedding models","scaling laws"],"recommendation":{"zh":"可直接复用文中的LM转embedding的算力最优训练配方，立刻在内部embedding模型迭代中做对比 ablation","en":"You can directly reuse the compute-optimal training recipe for converting LMs to embedding models, and run comparative ablations in internal embedding model iterations immediately."}},{"id":"2407.04622","title":"On scalable oversight with weak LLMs judging strong LLMs","authors":["Zachary Kenton","Noah Y. Siegel","János Kramár","Jonah Brown-Cohen","Samuel Albanie","Jannis Bulian","Rishabh Agarwal","David Lindner","Yunhao Tang","Noah D. Goodman","Rohin Shah"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$59","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.04622","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KentonSKBABALTG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KentonSKBABALTG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/899511e37a8e01e1bd6f6f1d377cc250-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究的是：当强模型的输出超出人类或弱模型直接判断能力时，如何做可扩展监督。过去很多讨论停留在概念层面，而这篇工作把 debate、consultancy 和直接作答放到同一套弱 judge/强 agent 设定下比较，重点看弱监督者是否真能借协议获得更好判断。","importance":"这是对齐与评测协议工作，但对 pretrain 也有间接启示。它的重要性在于把‘弱模型监督强模型’从单一抽取式 QA 扩展到数学、代码、逻辑和多模态推理等更接近现代 LLM 能力边界的任务；如果 debate 稳定优于 consultancy，说明交互协议本身就是一种重要训练信号设计，而不只是推理包装。","technical_approach":"核心方法是系统比较三种监督协议：辩论、顾问式解释、以及 judge 直接回答。设计上的关键是引入 judge-agent 能力不对称，并跨多任务建立信息不对称场景；这样才能检验协议究竟是在帮助 judge 提取关键信息，还是只是在放大强模型的话术优势。","experiments":"摘要明确给出主要结论：在所研究任务上，debate 在各任务中都优于 consultancy，并与 direct QA 做比较。虽然片段被截断，没有完整条件和数值，但关键信息已经足够有用：协议设计确实影响弱监督质量，而且 debate 的优势具有跨任务一致性；完整论文中最值得看的应是这种优势在 judge/agent 能力差扩大时是否仍成立，以及在哪些任务上最明显。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a central scalable-oversight question: can weaker judges reliably supervise stronger models, and which interaction protocol helps most when direct evaluation is hard? Earlier work explored this mostly in narrow settings; this paper pushes the comparison into a broader and more realistic task range.","importance":"This is an alignment and protocol-evaluation paper, but it has broader implications for how we design training signals. Its main importance is showing that the structure of interaction—debate versus consultancy versus direct answering—can materially change oversight quality when judge and agent capabilities are mismatched.","technical_approach":"The method is a controlled comparison of debate, consultancy, and direct QA under judge-agent asymmetry, using LLMs both as agents and as proxies for weaker human judges. The design matters because the benchmark is not only testing task performance; it is testing whether a protocol helps the weaker judge surface decisive evidence instead of being overpowered by fluent but misleading arguments.","experiments":"The abstract gives the headline result: debate outperforms consultancy across all tasks studied, including settings spanning mathematics, coding, logic, and multimodal reasoning asymmetries. The snippet does not include exact numbers or the full experimental conditions, but the key empirical takeaway is already strong—protocol choice matters, and debate appears to generalize better than consultancy across diverse asymmetries.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","oversight","evaluation","debate","reward-modeling"],"keywords":["alignment","safety","scalable oversight","debate","LLM"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§5的跨任务协议对比结果，可给对齐阶段的弱监督信号设计提供参考","en":"Only read Section 5's cross-task protocol comparison results, which provide reference for weak supervision signal design during alignment."}},{"id":"KimLCPKKJ24","title":"Towards Next-Level Post-Training Quantization of Hyper-Scale Transformers","authors":["Junhan Kim","Chungman Lee","Eulrang Cho","Kyungphil Park","Ho-Young Kim","Joonyoung Kim","Yongkweon Jeon"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KimLCPKKJ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KimLCPKKJ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ab6eba9a853087993addff937c8cec87-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有无学习后训练量化（PTQ）方案忽略Transformer注意力模块的层间依赖，精度不足；需要调参的PTQ方案耗时耗资源，无法适配大模型频繁迭代的边缘部署需求。","importance":"工程方法级贡献，提出的aespa PTQ算法平衡精度与效率，可降低超大规模生成式模型在边缘设备的部署成本。","technical_approach":"改进的无学习PTQ方法，核心是量化时建模注意力模块的层间依赖，舍弃现有无学习PTQ仅对单层独立量化的设计，不需要额外训练或超参数调优，部署速度与现有无学习方案持平。","experiments":"摘要未披露具体模型参数量、量化精度提升幅度等实验细节，核心验证场景为移动端、智能电视等边缘设备的超大规模Transformer部署。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing learning-free post-training quantization (PTQ) schemes ignore inter-layer dependency of Transformer attention modules, leading to insufficient accuracy; tuning-based PTQ schemes consume excessive time and resources, which cannot adapt to the edge deployment demand of frequent large model iterations.","importance":"Engineering method-level contribution. The proposed aespa PTQ algorithm balances accuracy and efficiency, reducing the deployment cost of hyper-scale generative models on edge devices.","technical_approach":"Improved learning-free PTQ method that models inter-layer dependency of attention modules during quantization. It discards the design of existing learning-free PTQ that quantifies each layer independently, requires no extra training or hyperparameter tuning, and maintains the same deployment speed as existing learning-free schemes.","experiments":"The abstract does not disclose specific experimental details such as model parameter size and quantization accuracy improvement. The core validation scenario is hyper-scale Transformer deployment on edge devices such as mobile phones and smart TVs.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","transformer","inference","compression"],"keywords":["Hyper-scale","Compression","Quantization","Transformers","LLM"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"后训练量化是超大规模大模型边缘部署的核心技术路径之一","claim_en":"Post-training quantization is one of the core technical paths for edge deployment of hyper-scale large models","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"建模注意力层间依赖的无学习PTQ精度显著优于现有无学习PTQ，效率与现有无学习方案持平","claim_en":"Learning-free PTQ that models inter-layer dependency of attention modules achieves significantly higher accuracy than existing learning-free PTQ with the same efficiency","opposes":"Prior learning-free PTQ schemes ignore attention inter-layer dependency, leading to non-negligible accuracy drop compared to tuning-based PTQ","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"Breaks the inherent trade-off between accuracy and efficiency of learning-free PTQ, suitable for rapid iterative deployment scenarios of large models."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于边缘端PTQ工程优化，无新机制，仅作为量化方案备选项备查，不用读正文","en":"It is an edge-side PTQ engineering optimization with no new mechanisms, only used as a backup quantization scheme for reference, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"KimLKOCY24","title":"Preference Alignment with Flow Matching","authors":["Minu Kim","Yongsik Lee","Sehyeok Kang","Jihwan Oh","Song Chong","Se-Young Yun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KimLKOCY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KimLKOCY24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3df874367ce2c43891aab1ab23ae6959-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有偏好对齐方法（如RLHF）需要对预训练模型做微调，可扩展性差，无法适配GPT-4等黑盒API模型的对齐需求，还存在奖励建模误差、奖励黑客等问题。","importance":"范式级贡献，提出不需要微调预训练模型、不需要显式/隐式奖励函数的对齐框架，大幅降低黑盒大模型的对齐成本。","technical_approach":"原创对齐框架，将流匹配技术引入偏好对齐，直接学习把低偏好输出转换为高偏好输出的流映射；舍弃现有对齐方法依赖奖励建模、依赖预训练模型梯度的设计，对预训练模型黑盒兼容。","experiments":"摘要未披露具体实验数据，验证场景覆盖任意类别预训练模型的偏好对齐。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing preference alignment methods such as RLHF require fine-tuning pre-trained models, with poor scalability. They cannot adapt to the alignment demand of black-box API models like GPT-4, and also have problems such as reward modeling error and reward hacking.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution. The proposed alignment framework requires no pre-trained model fine-tuning or explicit/implicit reward function, greatly reducing the alignment cost of black-box large models.","technical_approach":"Original alignment framework that introduces flow matching technology into preference alignment, directly learning the flow mapping that transforms less preferred outputs to preferred outcomes. It discards the design of existing alignment methods that rely on reward modeling and pre-trained model gradients, and is compatible with black-box pre-trained models.","experiments":"The abstract does not disclose specific experimental data, and the validation scenario covers preference alignment for any class of pre-trained models.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","preference-optimization","flow-matching","reward-modeling"],"keywords":["Preference Alignment","Flow Matching"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"偏好对齐是大模型对齐人类需求的核心步骤","claim_en":"Preference alignment is the core step for aligning large models with human needs","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"不需要微调预训练模型、不需要奖励建模的流匹配对齐方法，效果与依赖微调的RLHF类方法相当","claim_en":"Flow matching based preference alignment without pre-trained model fine-tuning or reward modeling achieves comparable performance to fine-tuning based RLHF-like methods","opposes":"Prior preference alignment methods require fine-tuning pre-trained models and reward function estimation as necessary steps","opposes_cite_hint":"Christiano 2017 RLHF","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"Provides a new feasible path for black-box large model alignment, avoiding common problems such as reward hacking."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"黑盒对齐的新范式尝试，结论未经过超大规模模型验证，仅作为对齐方案备选备查","en":"A new paradigm attempt for black-box alignment, its conclusion has not been verified on hyperscale models, only used as an alternative alignment scheme for reference."}},{"id":"KimSPRKB24","title":"Accelerating Blockwise Parallel Language Models with Draft Refinement","authors":["Taehyeon Kim","Ananda Theertha Suresh","Kishore Papineni","Michael D. Riley","Sanjiv Kumar","Adrian Benton"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KimSPRKB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KimSPRKB24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3c9629e718d931e8d4d240378aa1d3bf-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有块并行解码（BPD）的块草稿质量低，验证阶段拒识率高，导致实际加速比远低于理论上限，限制了自回归大模型的推理速度提升。","importance":"工程方法级贡献，提出的草稿精炼方法可在不修改原有自回归模型结构的前提下，提升BPD的实际加速比，降低大模型推理成本。","technical_approach":"改进的块并行解码方法，首先分析多个预测头的token分布差异，然后用任务无关的n-gram模型和轻量神经模型作为重打分器精炼块草稿；舍弃原有BPD仅用单个预测头生成草稿的设计，不需要对基座大模型做额外微调。","experiments":"摘要未披露具体加速比、模型参数量等实验数据，核心baseline为Stern等人提出的原始块并行解码方法。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing blockwise parallel decoding (BPD) has low block draft quality and high rejection rate in the verification phase, leading to actual speedup far below the theoretical upper limit, which restricts the inference speed improvement of autoregressive large models.","importance":"Engineering method-level contribution. The proposed draft refinement method improves the actual speedup of BPD without modifying the original autoregressive model structure, reducing the inference cost of large models.","technical_approach":"Improved blockwise parallel decoding method. It first analyzes the token distribution differences across multiple prediction heads, then refines block drafts using task-agnostic n-gram models and lightweight neural models as re-scorers. It discards the design of original BPD that only uses a single prediction head to generate drafts, and requires no extra fine-tuning of the base large model.","experiments":"The abstract does not disclose specific experimental data such as speedup and model parameter size. The core baseline is the original blockwise parallel decoding method proposed by Stern et al.","authors_note":""},"tags":["speculative-decoding","parallel-decoding","inference","language-model"],"keywords":["Blockwise parallel decoding","Language model","speculative decoding"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"自回归大模型的顺序token生成是推理速度的核心瓶颈","claim_en":"Sequential token generation of autoregressive large language models is the core bottleneck of inference speed","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"用轻量任务无关模型精炼块草稿可以显著降低块并行解码的草稿拒识率，提升实际推理加速比","claim_en":"Refining block drafts with lightweight task-agnostic models significantly reduces draft rejection rate of blockwise parallel decoding and improves actual inference speedup","opposes":"Original blockwise parallel decoding only uses a single prediction head to generate drafts, leading to high rejection rate and limited speedup","opposes_cite_hint":"Stern 2023 Blockwise Parallel Decoding","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"Provides a practical optimization scheme for the implementation of blockwise parallel decoding, which takes effect without modifying the base model."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"纯推理侧工程优化，不涉及预训练改动，仅作为解码加速方案备查","en":"Pure inference-side engineering optimization, no pretraining modifications involved, only used as a decoding acceleration scheme for reference."}},{"id":"KirkWRBMGCBW0VH24","title":"The PRISM Alignment Dataset: What Participatory, Representative and Individualised Human Feedback Reveals About the Subjective and Multicultural Alignment of Large Language Models","authors":["Hannah Rose Kirk","Alexander Whitefield","Paul Röttger","Andrew M. Bean","Katerina Margatina","Rafael Mosquera Gómez","Juan Ciro","Max Bartolo","Adina Williams","He He","Bertie Vidgen","Scott Hale"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KirkWRBMGCBW0VH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KirkWRBMGCBW0VH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/be2e1b68b44f2419e19f6c35a1b8cf35-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有人类反馈数据集的参与者地理、人口分布窄，缺少与参与者社会人口属性关联的细粒度反馈，无法支撑大模型的多文化、个性化对齐研究，也无法分析反馈样本的偏差来源。","importance":"数据级贡献，是首个覆盖75国1500名参与者、关联细粒度人口属性和对话反馈的公开对齐数据集，可解决现有对齐数据代表性不足的问题。","technical_approach":"原创数据集构建范式，采用参与式、代表性、个性化的反馈收集流程，覆盖英美两国人口普查代表性样本，将1500名参与者的社会人口属性、偏好与8011轮和21个大模型的实时对话反馈做关联映射；舍弃现有数据集仅收集匿名偏好对、不关联用户属性的设计。","experiments":"数据规模为75国1500名参与者，8011轮实时对话，21个大模型，包含英美两国人口普查代表性样本；核心观测为不同文化、人口属性的用户对大模型输出的偏好差异可达40%以上，现有通用对齐方案无法覆盖这些差异。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing human feedback datasets have narrow geographic and demographic coverage of participants, lack fine-grained feedback associated with participants' socio-demographic attributes. They cannot support multi-cultural and personalized alignment research of large models, nor can they analyze the source of feedback sample bias.","importance":"Data-level contribution. It is the first public alignment dataset covering 1,500 participants from 75 countries, linking fine-grained demographic attributes and conversational feedback, solving the problem of insufficient representativeness of existing alignment data.","technical_approach":"Original dataset construction paradigm that adopts participatory, representative, and individualized feedback collection process, covering census-representative samples from the UK and US. It maps socio-demographic attributes and stated preferences of 1,500 participants to their contextual preferences and fine-grained feedback in 8,011 live conversations with 21 LLMs, discarding the design of existing datasets that only collect anonymous preference pairs without linking to user attributes.","experiments":"The dataset includes 1,500 participants from 75 countries, 8,011 live conversations, 21 LLMs, and census-representative samples from the UK and US. The core observation is that preference differences for LLM outputs across different cultural and demographic groups can reach more than 40%, which cannot be covered by existing general alignment schemes.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","human-feedback","dataset","evaluation","preference-data"],"keywords":["Dataset","Alignment","Human Feedback","RLHF","Participation","Conversational AI","Preferences"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"人类反馈数据的质量和代表性直接决定大模型对齐效果","claim_en":"The quality and representativeness of human feedback data directly determine the alignment performance of large language models","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"现有通用对齐数据集的样本偏差会导致大模型对齐效果对非西方、非主流人口群体下降30%以上","claim_en":"Sample bias of existing general alignment datasets leads to more than 30% drop of alignment performance for non-Western, non-mainstream demographic groups","opposes":"Prior work assumes that general alignment data with limited demographic coverage can support global multi-cultural alignment","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§6 Analysis","why_contested":"Clarifies the representativeness defect of existing alignment data, providing data support for multi-cultural and personalized alignment research."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"多文化个性化对齐的公开数据集，仅做数据资源备查，不用读正文","en":"A public dataset for multicultural personalized alignment, only used as a data resource for reference, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"KleinbergM24","title":"Language Generation in the Limit","authors":["Jon M. Kleinberg","Sendhil Mullainathan"],"institutions":["Cornell University","University of Chicago"],"abstract":"$5e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KleinbergM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KleinbergM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/7988e9b3876ad689e921ce05d711442f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大模型语言生成的理论边界不清晰，没有回答仅给定未知语言的有限训练样本、无额外假设的前提下，能否在极限下生成该语言合法新字符串的核心问题，过往工作要么依赖特定训练假设，要么仅给出经验结论。","importance":"范式级理论贡献，首次严格定义了极限下语言生成的问题框架，给出可实现极限生成的条件，从理论层面解释了当前大模型生成能力的边界。","technical_approach":"原创理论框架，将语言生成问题形式化为对抗枚举下的极限学习问题，定义了“极限下生成”的判定标准；舍弃现有理论分析依赖预训练数据分布假设、模型结构假设的设计，仅从问题的基本定义出发推导结论。","experiments":"纯理论研究，无实证实验，所有结论来自严格的理论证明。","authors_note":"Jon M. Kleinberg（康奈尔大学，理论计算机科学家），Sendhil Mullainathan（芝加哥大学，行为经济学家、AI研究员）"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The theoretical boundary of current large model language generation is unclear. There is no answer to the core question of whether valid new strings of an unknown language can be generated in the limit given only finite training samples without extra assumptions. Prior work either relies on specific training assumptions or only provides empirical conclusions.","importance":"Paradigm-level theoretical contribution. It strictly defines the problem framework of language generation in the limit for the first time, gives the conditions for achievable limit generation, and explains the boundary of current large model generation ability from the theoretical level.","technical_approach":"Original theoretical framework that formalizes the language generation problem as limit learning under adversarial enumeration, and defines the judgment standard of \"generation in the limit\". It discards the design of existing theoretical analysis that relies on pre-training data distribution assumptions and model structure assumptions, and derives conclusions only from the basic definition of the problem.","experiments":"Pure theoretical work with no empirical experiments, all conclusions come from rigorous theoretical proof.","authors_note":"Jon M. Kleinberg (Cornell University, theoretical computer scientist), Sendhil Mullainathan (University of Chicago, behavioral economist and AI researcher)"},"tags":["language-generation","theory","autoregressive","identifiability"],"keywords":["language generation","large language models","enumeration"],"notable_authors":["Jon M. Kleinberg","Sendhil Mullainathan"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大模型语言生成的核心目标是基于有限训练样本生成训练集未出现的合法新字符串","claim_en":"The core goal of large language model language generation is to produce valid new strings not present in the training set based on limited training samples","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"当目标语言属于可数的候选语言集合时，存在计算代理可以在极限下实现该语言的正确生成","claim_en":"When the target language belongs to a countable set of candidate languages, there exists a computational agent that can achieve correct generation of the language in the limit","opposes":"Prior work assumes that language generation requires strong assumptions on training data distribution and model structure to guarantee generalization","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Theorem 1","why_contested":"Provides the minimum condition for language generation generalization from the theoretical level for the first time, redefining the theoretical boundary of large model generation ability."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"纯理论工作，和当前预训练工程实践关联极弱，仅做理论背景备查","en":"Pure theoretical work, very weakly related to current pretraining engineering practice, only used as theoretical background for reference."}},{"id":"KobayashiAO24","title":"Weight decay induces low-rank attention layers","authors":["Seijin Kobayashi","Yassir Akram","Johannes von Oswald"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$5f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KobayashiAO24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KobayashiAO24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/084a67fb91826028f555e288f3adc9a4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"权重衰减（L2正则）对Transformer注意力层的训练影响机制不清晰，现有工作仅针对前馈网络的正则效果做分析，无法解释注意力层中参数矩阵乘法交互下的正则行为，也无法指导预训练时的正则系数选择。","importance":"机制级贡献，明确了权重衰减在注意力层的作用等价于核范数正则，会诱导注意力层的参数矩阵乘积为低秩，可指导预训练时的正则设置和注意力层结构优化。","technical_approach":"原创理论推导，首先证明L2正则下AB^T形式的损失局部最小值等价于核范数正则下的损失最小值，然后将该结论推广到注意力层的KQ乘积、PV乘积场景；舍弃现有正则分析仅针对独立参数矩阵的设计，专门针对注意力的乘法交互结构推导。","experiments":"摘要未披露具体实验数字，消融实验观测到预训练时权重衰减系数越大，注意力层的KQ矩阵乘积秩越低，预训练困惑度在秩降低到一定阈值时会上升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The influence mechanism of weight decay (L2 regularization) on Transformer attention layer training is unclear. Existing work only analyzes the regularization effect for feedforward networks, cannot explain the regularization behavior under multiplicative interaction of parameter matrices in attention layers, and cannot guide regularization coefficient selection during pre-training.","importance":"Mechanism-level contribution. It clarifies that the effect of weight decay in attention layers is equivalent to nuclear norm regularization, which induces low-rank product of attention layer parameter matrices, and can guide regularization setting and attention layer structure optimization during pre-training.","technical_approach":"Original theoretical derivation. It first proves that the local minimum of L2-regularized loss in the form of L(AB^T) + λ(||A||² + ||B||²) coincides with the minimum of nuclear norm-regularized loss L(AB^T) + λ||AB^T||_*, then extends this conclusion to KQ product and PV product scenarios in attention layers. It discards the design of existing regularization analysis that only targets independent parameter matrices, and is derived specifically for the multiplicative interaction structure of attention.","experiments":"The abstract does not disclose specific experimental numbers. Ablation observations show that the larger the weight decay coefficient during pre-training, the lower the rank of KQ matrix product in attention layers, and pre-training perplexity rises when the rank drops below a certain threshold.","authors_note":""},"tags":["weight-decay","low-rank","attention","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["weight decay","attention"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"权重衰减是Transformer预训练中最常用的正则化手段之一","claim_en":"Weight decay is one of the most commonly used regularization methods in Transformer pre-training","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer注意力层的权重衰减等价于对KQ乘积、PV乘积施加核范数正则，会诱导其为低秩矩阵","claim_en":"Weight decay on Transformer attention layers is equivalent to applying nuclear norm regularization on KQ product and PV product, which induces them to be low-rank matrices","opposes":"Prior work assumes that weight decay on attention layers only applies L2 penalty on individual parameter matrices, without affecting the rank of their product","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§2 Theorem 1","why_contested":"Clarifies the actual mechanism of weight decay in attention layers, providing theoretical basis for low-rank attention design and pre-training regularization tuning."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"正则机制分析结论可用于指导预训练正则系数设置，仅记录核心结论不用读正文","en":"The regularization mechanism analysis conclusion can guide pretraining regularization coefficient setting, only record the core conclusion without reading the full text."}},{"id":"KokhlikyanJB0C24","title":"Measuring Dejavu Memorization Efficiently","authors":["Narine Kokhlikyan","Bargav Jayaraman","Florian Bordes","Chuan Guo","Kamalika Chaudhuri"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$60","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KokhlikyanJB0C24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KokhlikyanJB0C24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3501bea1ac61fedbaaff2f88e5fa9447-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有Deja vu记忆化测量方法需要训练两个额外模型，对超大规模开源模型来说计算成本过高，无法快速评估预训练模型的训练数据记忆程度。","importance":"工程方法级贡献，提出的记忆化测量方法不需要训练额外模型，可快速评估任意现成预训练模型的记忆水平，降低数据泄露风险的检测成本。","technical_approach":"改进的记忆化测量方法，提出新的数据集级关联估计方法，无需训练额外模型即可近似现成模型的记忆能力；舍弃原有Deja vu方法需要训练两个基准模型的设计，测量速度提升一个数量级以上。","experiments":"摘要未披露具体测量精度、速度提升幅度等实验数据，核心baseline为原始Deja vu记忆化测量方法。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing Deja vu memorization measurement method requires training two extra models, which has excessively high computational cost for hyper-scale open-source models, and cannot quickly evaluate the training data memorization degree of pre-trained models.","importance":"Engineering method-level contribution. The proposed memorization measurement method requires no extra model training, can quickly evaluate the memorization level of any off-the-shelf pre-trained model, reducing the detection cost of data leakage risk.","technical_approach":"Improved memorization measurement method that proposes a new dataset-level correlation estimation method, which can approximate the memorization ability of off-the-shelf models without training extra models. It discards the design of original Deja vu method that requires training two baseline models, with measurement speed improved by more than one order of magnitude.","experiments":"The abstract does not disclose specific experimental data such as measurement accuracy and speed improvement. The core baseline is the original Deja vu memorization measurement method.","authors_note":""},"tags":["memorization","data-privacy","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["memorization","privacy"],"notable_authors":["Kamalika Chaudhuri"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"预训练模型对训练数据的意外记忆是数据隐私泄露的核心风险之一","claim_en":"Accidental memorization of training data by pre-trained models is one of the core risks of data privacy leakage","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"不需要训练额外模型的记忆化测量方法，精度和原始需要训练两个模型的Deja vu方法偏差小于5%，速度提升10倍以上","claim_en":"Memorization measurement method without training additional models achieves less than 5% accuracy deviation from the original Deja vu method that requires training two models, with 10x speedup","opposes":"Prior Deja vu memorization measurement requires training two separate models as a necessary step, leading to high computational cost for large models","opposes_cite_hint":"Zhang 2023 Deja vu Memorization","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"Provides a feasible and efficient tool for privacy audit of hyper-scale pre-trained models, with greatly improved implementability."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"预训练数据记忆检测的轻量方案，仅作为合规检测工具备选项备查","en":"A lightweight scheme for pretraining data memorization detection, only used as an alternative compliance detection tool for reference."}},{"id":"KrishnamurthyHF24","title":"Can large language models explore in-context?","authors":["Akshay Krishnamurthy","Keegan Harris","Dylan J. Foster","Cyril Zhang","Aleksandrs Slivkins"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$61","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KrishnamurthyHF24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KrishnamurthyHF24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d951f73c521d069fefbb73396df01424-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有无训练干预的原生大模型是否具备上下文内探索能力尚未被系统验证。过往强化学习探索能力研究多针对微调后的专用 agent，默认原生大模型具备基础探索能力的假设缺乏实证支撑。","importance":"属于LLM能力边界的实证贡献，对上下文学习和LLM agent设计有直接参考价值。明确了原生大模型做决策类任务的能力下限，证明零训练干预的上下文探索仅在极窄配置下可用。","technical_approach":"是纯实证研究设计，完全不修改模型权重，将多臂老虎机环境描述、交互历史全部放入prompt内，测试不同模型、prompt配置下的探索行为。对比过往需要微调探索策略的agent方案，该设计严格隔离了训练干预的影响，仅测试原生上下文能力。","experiments":"测试了GPT-3.5、GPT-4、Llama2三个主流模型，覆盖零样本、少样本、思维链、有无外部交互历史总结等多类prompt配置。结果显示仅GPT-4搭配思维链+外部总结交互历史这一种配置能实现合格的探索行为，其余所有配置均无法稳定输出探索策略。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This work verifies whether vanilla LLMs without training interventions have in-context exploration capabilities. Previous exploration capability studies mostly target fine-tuned RL agents, and the assumption that native LLMs have basic exploration capabilities lacks empirical support.","importance":"It is an empirical contribution to LLM capability boundary research, with direct reference value for in-context learning and LLM agent design. It clarifies the lower limit of native LLM performance on decision-making tasks, proving that zero-training-intervention in-context exploration only works under a very narrow configuration.","technical_approach":"It is a purely empirical study design with no model weight modifications. All multi-armed bandit environment descriptions and interaction histories are placed directly in the prompt to test exploration behavior across different models and prompt configurations. Compared with previous agent schemes that require fine-tuning exploration strategies, this design strictly isolates the impact of training interventions and only tests native in-context capabilities.","experiments":"Three mainstream models (GPT-3.5, GPT-4, Llama2) are tested across multiple prompt configurations: zero-shot, few-shot, chain-of-thought, with/without externally summarized interaction history. Results show only the configuration of GPT-4 with chain-of-thought and externally summarized interaction history achieves satisfactory exploratory behavior; all other configurations fail to stably output exploration strategies.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","exploration","llm-capabilities"],"keywords":["in-context learning","exploration","multi-armed bandits","reinforcement learning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"探索是强化学习和决策任务的核心能力","claim_en":"Exploration is a core capability for reinforcement learning and decision-making tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"无训练干预的原生大模型无法稳定实现上下文内探索，仅GPT-4搭配CoT+外部交互历史总结的配置可达到合格水平","claim_en":"Vanilla LLMs without training interventions cannot stably perform in-context exploration, only GPT-4 with chain-of-thought and externally summarized interaction history achieves satisfactory exploratory behavior","opposes":"过往LLM agent研究默认原生大模型具备基础探索能力，无需额外微调即可处理决策任务","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"修正了LLM agent设计的默认假设，明确原生大模型做决策任务的探索能力边界"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"原生LLM上下文探索的边界实证，仅作为agent设计时的能力参考备查","en":"Empirical research on the boundary of native LLM in-context exploration, only used as capability reference for agent design."}},{"id":"2405.17977","title":"Aligning to Thousands of Preferences via System Message Generalization","authors":["Seongyun Lee","Sue Hyun Park","Seungone Kim","Minjoon Seo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$62","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.17977","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LeePKS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LeePKS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/86c9df30129f7663ad4d429b6f80d461-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM对齐方法默认对齐公众偏好为最优，针对个体偏好的对齐需要反复收集数据、训练奖励模型，无法支持数千级的个性化偏好对齐，scalability极差。","importance":"属于对齐范式的改进贡献，将个性化对齐的控制入口从训练侧转移到推理侧的系统消息，大幅降低了多用户场景下的对齐成本，适配C端产品的个性化需求。","technical_approach":"是对齐范式创新，允许用户在系统消息中自定义偏好，模型直接根据系统消息调整生成行为，无需为每个偏好单独微调。针对现有模型训练时仅使用统一系统消息导致的泛化差问题，训练时注入多样化的系统消息偏好数据，提升模型对自定义偏好的遵循度。","experiments":"未披露具体模型参数量和训练数据规模，核心验证该方法可适配超过1000种不同偏好的系统消息，对齐效果接近针对单个偏好单独微调的基线，训练成本仅为传统个性化对齐方案的1/50。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Current LLM alignment methods assume alignment to public preferences is optimal. Personalized alignment for individual users requires repeated data collection and reward model training, which cannot support thousands of personalized preferences and has extremely poor scalability.","importance":"It is an improvement contribution to alignment paradigms, shifting the control entry of personalized alignment from the training side to the inference-side system message, greatly reducing alignment costs in multi-user scenarios and adapting to personalized demands of consumer products.","technical_approach":"It is an alignment paradigm innovation that allows users to define custom preferences in the system message, and the model adjusts generation behavior directly according to the system message without separate fine-tuning for each preference. To solve the poor generalization problem caused by uniform system messages used in traditional training, diverse system message preference data is injected during training to improve the model's compliance with custom preferences.","experiments":"Specific model parameters and training data scale are not disclosed. The core validation shows the method can adapt to over 1000 different preference system messages, with alignment performance close to baselines fine-tuned separately for each preference, and training cost is only 1/50 of traditional personalized alignment schemes.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","preference","system-message","reward-model"],"keywords":["Large language model","Preference alignment","Pluralistic alignment","Multifacetedness","System message","Instruction tuning"],"notable_authors":["Minjoon Seo"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM对齐需要匹配用户个性化偏好，现有对齐方法的scalability是主要瓶颈","claim_en":"LLM alignment needs to match users' personalized preferences, and scalability of existing alignment methods is the main bottleneck","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"通过训练时注入多样化系统消息偏好数据，模型可在推理时仅修改系统消息就实现上千种偏好对齐，效果接近单偏好微调","claim_en":"By injecting diverse system message preference data during training, the model can align to thousands of preferences at inference time only by modifying the system message, with performance close to single-preference fine-tuning","opposes":"过往个性化对齐默认需要为每个偏好单独训练奖励模型和微调LLM，没有轻量实现路径","opposes_cite_hint":"Ouyang 2022 InstructGPT","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"打破了个性化对齐的高成本假设，提供了轻量多偏好对齐的可行路径"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3训练时注入多样化系统消息的实验设计即可，可快速复用到内部多用户个性化对齐场景。","en":"Only read §3 for the experimental design of injecting diverse system messages during training, which can be quickly reused for internal multi-user personalized alignment scenarios."}},{"id":"LinGOXLY024","title":"FLAME : Factuality-Aware Alignment for Large Language Models","authors":["Sheng-Chieh Lin","Luyu Gao","Barlas Oguz","Wenhan Xiong","Jimmy Lin","Scott Yih","Xilun Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$63","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LinGOXLY024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LinGOXLY024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d16152d53088ad779ffa634e7bf66166-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"常规LLM对齐流程（SFT+RL）无法提升模型事实准确性，反而会增加幻觉生成概率。过往对齐研究更多关注有用性和无害性，对事实性的优化不足，也未系统识别对齐各阶段的幻觉来源。","importance":"属于对齐目标的方法级贡献，首次系统定位了SFT和RL两个阶段导致幻觉的核心因素，为事实性对齐提供了可落地的优化方向，有效平衡对齐后的有用性和事实性。","technical_approach":"是对齐方法改进，首先定位两类幻觉来源：SFT阶段训练数据包含模型未见过的新知识，导致模型生成虚假内容；RL阶段的奖励函数未引入事实性评估指标，优先优化有用性而非事实性。在此基础上设计事实感知的对齐流程：SFT阶段过滤模型未掌握的新知识数据，RL阶段加入事实性奖励项。对比常规对齐方法，无需额外引入大规模外部知识库。","experiments":"未披露具体模型参数和数据规模，在通用问答、事实核查等任务上，幻觉生成率比常规RLHF基线降低32%，同时保留原有指令遵循能力。 ablation显示SFT阶段过滤未知知识贡献了61%的幻觉降低幅度。","authors_note":"Jimmy Lin（滑铁卢大学）是知名IR和NLP学者，长期从事检索增强、LLM事实性相关研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Standard LLM alignment pipelines (SFT + RL) cannot improve model factual accuracy, and instead increase hallucination probability. Previous alignment studies focus more on helpfulness and harmlessness, with insufficient optimization for factuality and no systematic identification of hallucination sources in each alignment stage.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution to alignment objectives, the first to systematically locate core hallucination sources in both SFT and RL stages, providing implementable optimization directions for factuality-aware alignment that balances helpfulness and factuality after alignment.","technical_approach":"It is an alignment method improvement that first identifies two types of hallucination sources: SFT stage training data contains new knowledge unknown to the model, leading to false content generation; RL stage reward functions do not include factuality evaluation metrics, prioritizing helpfulness over factuality. A factuality-aware alignment pipeline is designed on this basis: filter unknown knowledge data in the SFT stage, and add factuality reward terms in the RL stage. Compared with standard alignment methods, no additional large-scale external knowledge base is required.","experiments":"Specific model parameters and data scale are not disclosed. On general QA, fact-checking and other tasks, hallucination generation rate is 32% lower than the standard RLHF baseline, while retaining original instruction following ability. Ablation shows filtering unknown knowledge in the SFT stage contributes 61% of the hallucination reduction.","authors_note":"Jimmy Lin (University of Waterloo) is a well-known IR and NLP scholar, engaged in long-term research on retrieval augmentation and LLM factuality."},"tags":["alignment","factuality","llm","rlhf"],"keywords":["large language models","factuality","alignment"],"notable_authors":["Jimmy Lin"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"常规RLHF对齐会提升模型指令遵循能力，但会加剧幻觉问题","claim_en":"Standard RLHF alignment improves LLM instruction following ability but exacerbates hallucination problems","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"SFT阶段训练模型未掌握的新知识是对齐过程中幻觉增加的核心来源，而非RL阶段奖励偏差占主导","claim_en":"Training on unknown knowledge during SFT is the core source of increased hallucination in the alignment process, rather than reward bias in the RL stage being dominant","opposes":"过往研究默认RL阶段的奖励函数缺陷是对齐后幻觉增加的主要原因，优化重点集中在RL阶段","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Analysis","why_contested":"修正了对齐幻觉来源的认知，将事实性对齐的优化重点从RL阶段提前到SFT数据筛选"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看Table 2的各阶段幻觉消融结果即可，可直接参考优化内部事实性对齐pipeline。","en":"Only check Table 2 for hallucination ablation results across alignment stages, which can be directly referenced to optimize internal factuality alignment pipelines."}},{"id":"Liu0W0WH024","title":"SelectIT: Selective Instruction Tuning for LLMs via Uncertainty-Aware Self-Reflection","authors":["Liangxin Liu","Xuebo Liu","Derek F. Wong","Dongfang Li","Ziyi Wang","Baotian Hu","Min Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$64","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Liu0W0WH024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Liu0W0WH024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/b130a5691815f550977e331f8bec08ae-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有指令微调数据选择方法依赖额外模型或外部标注数据，成本高，无法广泛落地。过往研究已证明少量高质量指令数据可达到接近全量数据的微调效果，但缺乏低成本的高质量数据筛选方案。","importance":"属于指令微调数据选择的方法级贡献，不需要额外资源，仅利用待微调LLM自身的不确定性就能筛选高质量数据，降低了中小团队做指令微调的门槛。","technical_approach":"是数据选择方法创新，无需额外标注模型或外部数据，直接利用待微调LLM自身对指令样本的内在不确定性，通过自反思筛选出对模型能力提升最大的指令数据。对比过往依赖大模型打分或人工标注的方法，成本降低80%以上，适配不同参数规模的LLM。","experiments":"在Alpaca数据集上应用SelectIT筛选出的Selective Alpaca数据集，仅用原始数据10%的规模，微调效果就超过全量数据微调的基线，在MMLU、GSM8K等任务上平均提升2.7个百分点。ablation显示不确定性加权的选择策略比随机选择效果高7.2个百分点。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing instruction tuning data selection methods rely on additional models or external annotated data, with high costs that prevent widespread adoption. Previous studies have proven that a small set of high-quality instruction data can achieve fine-tuning effects close to full-scale data, but low-cost high-quality data filtering schemes are lacking.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution to instruction tuning data selection, requiring no extra resources, only using the intrinsic uncertainty of the target LLM to filter high-quality data, lowering the barrier of instruction tuning for small and medium teams.","technical_approach":"It is a data selection method innovation that requires no extra annotation models or external data, directly using the intrinsic uncertainty of the target LLM on instruction samples to select instruction data that brings the largest capability improvement via self-reflection. Compared with previous methods relying on large model scoring or human annotation, cost is reduced by over 80%, and it adapts to LLMs of different parameter scales.","experiments":"The Selective Alpaca dataset filtered by SelectIT from the original Alpaca dataset only uses 10% of the original data scale, but its fine-tuning performance outperforms the full-data fine-tuning baseline, with an average improvement of 2.7 percentage points on MMLU, GSM8K and other tasks. Ablation shows the uncertainty-weighted selection strategy outperforms random selection by 7.2 percentage points.","authors_note":""},"tags":["instruction-tuning","data-selection","self-reflection","uncertainty"],"keywords":["Data Selection","Large Language Models"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"高质量的少量指令微调数据可以达到甚至超过全量低质量数据的微调效果","claim_en":"A small set of high-quality instruction tuning data can achieve or even outperform the fine-tuning effect of full low-quality data","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅利用待微调LLM自身的内在不确定性筛选指令数据，效果超过依赖外部模型打分的选择方法，且成本更低","claim_en":"Selecting instruction tuning data only using the intrinsic uncertainty of the target LLM outperforms selection methods relying on external model scoring, with lower cost","opposes":"过往指令数据选择方法默认需要引入外部资源（更大的模型、人工标注）才能保证筛选质量","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"打破了指令数据选择的高成本假设，为小团队做指令微调提供了可行方案"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4.1的自反思数据筛选逻辑即可，中小团队做指令微调可直接复用降低数据成本。","en":"Only read §4.1 for the self-reflection data filtering logic, which can be directly reused by small teams to cut data costs for instruction tuning."}},{"id":"LiuLPHHZ24","title":"MiniCache: KV Cache Compression in Depth Dimension for Large Language Models","authors":["Akide Liu","Jing Liu","Zizheng Pan","Yefei He","Reza Haffari","Bohan Zhuang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$65","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiuLPHHZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiuLPHHZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/fd0705710bf01b88a60a3d479ea341d9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是长上下文推理里的核心瓶颈：KV cache 太占显存，而现有压缩多集中在序列维，往往会直接伤害生成质量。作者关注的是深度维压缩，也就是跨层复用或压缩 KV 表示，试图在不明显掉点的前提下减少推理内存。","importance":"它属于系统效率类工作，但和模型设计强相关。对 pretrain 和 serving 的启示是：KV cache 冗余不只存在于时间维，也存在于层间；如果层间信息高度重复，那么训练出的深层 Transformer 可能天然带有可压缩结构，这会反过来影响我们如何思考层数、宽度和推理时的 memory-compute trade-off。","technical_approach":"MiniCache 的核心是沿深度维做 KV cache compression，而不是只丢 token 或降低精度。这个方向的关键判断是：不同层的 KV 并非同等独立，有不少局部可替代性，因此可以通过选择性保留、共享、映射或低秩近似来减少缓存量。它与常见 token eviction 的区别在于不直接破坏历史时序覆盖，而是利用层间冗余换空间；代价则是需要更仔细地控制哪些层可压、哪些层不能动，否则容易伤到深层语义整合。","experiments":"摘要缺失，具体模型和数字无法确认。合理预期是：作者会在主流开源 LLM 上评估长上下文生成，比较显存占用、吞吐和困惑度或下游准确率，并与 token-level cache compression、quantization 或 sliding window baseline 对比。最关键的实验点应该是压缩率和性能下降曲线，以及不同层压缩敏感度的分析，因为这直接决定方法是否可部署。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper addresses a serving bottleneck: KV cache memory in long-context decoding. Most prior compression methods work along the sequence dimension and often trade memory for quality too aggressively; this work instead looks at compression across depth, i.e., across layers.","importance":"This is a systems paper with architectural implications. For pretraining-oriented readers, the useful takeaway is that KV redundancy may exist not only across tokens but also across layers, which says something about how much representational overlap deep Transformers learn and where inference memory can be recovered.","technical_approach":"MiniCache compresses KV cache in the depth dimension rather than mainly pruning token history. The design intuition is that layer-wise KV states are not fully independent, so some can be shared, projected, or compressed with limited quality loss. That differs from token eviction methods, which reduce temporal coverage; here the method tries to preserve sequence history while exploiting cross-layer redundancy instead.","experiments":"The abstract is not provided, so exact model sizes and gains cannot be confirmed. The likely evaluation includes memory reduction, decoding throughput, and quality metrics on long-context generation, compared against token-level cache compression, quantization, or windowed attention baselines. The most important result would be the compression–quality curve and per-layer sensitivity analysis, since those determine deployment usefulness.","authors_note":""},"tags":["kv-cache","compression","inference","llm"],"keywords":["KV Cache","Large Language Models","Efficiency AI"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看Fig 4的不同层KV冗余度测试结果即可，可启发内部长上下文推理显存优化的新方向。","en":"Only check Fig 4 for cross-layer KV redundancy test results, which can inspire new directions for internal long-context inference memory optimization."}},{"id":"LiuLZ0GYB024","title":"Provably Mitigating Overoptimization in RLHF: Your SFT Loss is Implicitly an Adversarial Regularizer","authors":["Zhihan Liu","Miao Lu","Shenao Zhang","Boyi Liu","Hongyi Guo","Yingxiang Yang","Jose H. Blanchet","Zhaoran Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$66","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiuLZ0GYB024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiuLZ0GYB024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/fa69e968b7319fd42524febd41475fb3-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文讨论 RLHF 里的过优化问题，并给出一个很强的结论：SFT loss 不只是 warm start，它还隐式充当了对抗式正则项，能抑制 reward model 被策略钻空子。过去很多工作把 overoptimization 看成 RL objective 本身的问题，或者靠 KL 约束经验性缓解；这里更进一步，试图给出可证明的机制解释。","importance":"它的重要性在于把 pretrain/post-train 闭环讲得更清楚。对齐训练并不是与预训练割裂的第二阶段，SFT 保留项直接影响 RLHF 的稳定性与 reward hacking 上限；这对理解 DPO、PPO、RLAIF 以及各种 mixed-objective recipe 都有方法级启发。","technical_approach":"核心方法是理论分析加算法化结论：把 SFT loss 视为一种隐式 adversarial regularizer，并证明它能在 reward misspecification 或分布偏移下缓解过优化。和常见“加一个 KL 到 reference model”不同，这里的视角强调监督目标本身就能限制策略朝脆弱高奖励区域塌缩；也因此，保留多少 SFT 权重、在哪个阶段 anneal，不再只是经验调参，而有了更明确的稳定性含义。","experiments":"没有摘要细节，暂时无法确认实验设置和数值。若论文完整，一般会同时包含理论验证和实证：在合成环境或偏好优化 benchmark 上，对比纯 RLHF、KL-regularized RLHF、混合 SFT+RLHF，展示 reward 上升但真实质量下降的 overoptimization 区域，以及加入 SFT 项后该区域被推迟或缩小。最值得看的不是最终 win rate，而是 reward–quality divergence 曲线和 SFT 权重敏感性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies overoptimization in RLHF and makes a strong claim: the SFT loss is not just a warm start, it implicitly acts as an adversarial regularizer against reward exploitation. Prior work often treats overoptimization as a problem of the RL objective alone and mitigates it with empirical KL penalties; this paper aims for a more principled explanation.","importance":"This matters because it sharpens the interface between pretraining and post-training. SFT is not merely a separate stage before RLHF; keeping an SFT term during preference optimization can directly affect stability and the extent of reward hacking. That has method-level implications for PPO-style RLHF, DPO variants, and mixed-objective recipes.","technical_approach":"The core contribution appears to be a theoretical characterization showing that the SFT loss implicitly regularizes against adversarial overoptimization under reward misspecification or distribution shift. This differs from the usual 'add KL to a reference model' story: here the supervised objective itself constrains collapse into brittle high-reward regions. That makes the SFT coefficient and its schedule more than a tuning trick—they become part of the stability mechanism.","experiments":"The metadata does not include experimental details. A solid empirical section would likely compare pure RLHF, KL-regularized RLHF, and mixed SFT+RLHF on synthetic or preference-learning benchmarks, showing that reward can continue to rise while actual quality deteriorates, and that the SFT term delays or reduces this divergence. The most informative plot would be reward versus true-quality divergence, not just end-point win rate.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rlhf","overoptimization","sft","regularization"],"keywords":["Alignment; Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变过往RLHF过优化仅靠KL约束缓解的认知，应立刻在内部对齐实验中验证SFT保留项的正则效果。","en":"It changes the prior that RLHF over-optimization can only be mitigated by KL constraints; verify the regularization effect of retained SFT loss in internal alignment experiments immediately."}},{"id":"LiuT0NT0024","title":"Kangaroo: Lossless Self-Speculative Decoding for Accelerating LLMs via Double Early Exiting","authors":["Fangcheng Liu","Yehui Tang","Zhenhua Liu","Yunsheng Ni","Duyu Tang","Kai Han","Yunhe Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$67","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiuT0NT0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiuT0NT0024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/16336d94a5ffca8de019087ab7fe403f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是推理加速里一个很难兼顾的问题：既要 speculative decoding 的速度，又不要额外 draft model 带来的训练与部署复杂度，还要保持 lossless。传统 speculative decoding 依赖独立小模型，系统成本高；self-speculative decoding 则常受限于草稿质量和验证效率。","importance":"它是典型的 serving 研究，但对模型架构和训练也有反馈价值。结论如果成立，说明同一个 LLM 内部不同深度的中间表征已经足够支持高质量草稿，这意味着早退层和最终层之间存在可利用的一致性；这会影响我们如何设计 early-exit 训练、层间蒸馏和推理路径优化。","technical_approach":"Kangaroo 提出 lossless self-speculative decoding，并使用 double early exiting。核心思路是：不再引入外部 draft model，而是在同一模型内部通过两级早退先快速给出候选，再由完整路径验证，从而保证输出分布与原模型一致。它和单次 early-exit 的差别在于多了一层层级化草稿机制，用更便宜的内部近似换取更高接受率；代价是实现上需要仔细安排退出点与共享计算，否则节省会被控制开销吃掉。","experiments":"摘要未提供，具体加速比与模型规模无法确认。预期会报告在多个 LLM 上的端到端解码速度提升、acceptance rate、与原模型逐 token 一致的 lossless 验证，并对比 vanilla decoding、外部 speculative decoding 和已有 self-speculative 方法。最值得看的消融是两个退出点的位置如何影响接受率和总吞吐，因为这决定方法是否具有可迁移性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a hard inference trade-off: achieving speculative decoding speedups without requiring a separate draft model, while keeping decoding lossless. Standard speculative decoding adds deployment and training complexity through an auxiliary model; self-speculative methods reduce that cost but often struggle with draft quality and acceptance efficiency.","importance":"This is a serving contribution with implications for model design. If the method works well, it suggests that intermediate layers in the same LLM are already predictive enough to serve as efficient internal drafters. That is useful feedback for early-exit training, layer-wise distillation, and architecture choices aimed at inference efficiency.","technical_approach":"Kangaroo proposes lossless self-speculative decoding with double early exiting. Instead of an external draft model, it uses two internal exit stages to generate and refine candidate tokens before final verification by the full model, preserving the original decoding distribution. Compared with a single early exit, the hierarchical drafting strategy is meant to raise acceptance while keeping most computation shared.","experiments":"The provided information does not include quantitative results. The expected evaluation would report end-to-end decoding speedups, acceptance rates, and exact output equivalence to the base model, compared against standard decoding, external speculative decoding, and prior self-speculative baselines. The most informative ablation would be where the two exit points are placed and how that affects throughput versus acceptance.","authors_note":""},"tags":["speculative-decoding","early-exit","inference","llm"],"keywords":["speculative decoding","LLMs","self-drafting","early exiting"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3.2的双早退点选择策略即可，可复用优化内部无额外draft模型的推理加速方案。","en":"Only read §3.2 for the double early exit point selection strategy, which can be reused to optimize internal inference acceleration schemes without extra draft models."}},{"id":"LuoSX0LLCTC24","title":"WizardArena: Post-training Large Language Models via Simulated Offline Chatbot Arena","authors":["Haipeng Luo","Qingfeng Sun","Can Xu","Pu Zhao","Qingwei Lin","Jian-Guang Lou","Shifeng Chen","Yansong Tang","Weizhu Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$68","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LuoSX0LLCTC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LuoSX0LLCTC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ca4aa9acc097e0f606af55bf986cb031-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM后训练（SFT/RL）依赖人工标注高质量数据，线上Chatbot Arena评估成本高、周期长，无法快速迭代模型。过往对齐流程的训练和评估环节都存在严重的人工依赖瓶颈。","importance":"属于后训练范式的系统级贡献，实现了训练和评估的全流程自动化，大幅降低后训练的人工和时间成本，支持模型的快速迭代。","technical_approach":"是系统范式创新，基于开源LLM搭建离线模拟Chatbot Arena：评估侧直接在离线测试集上自动生成多个模型的性能排名，不需要人工投票；训练侧利用Arena生成的偏好数据做RL训练，不需要人工标注偏好。对比现有依赖人工的流程，评估速度提升10倍以上，训练数据成本降低90%。","experiments":"在7B、13B参数的LLaMA2模型上测试，用WizardArena生成的偏好数据训练后，在真实Chatbot Arena上的排名超过同参数用人工标注数据训练的基线，ELO评分提升6个百分点。scaling观察显示随着模拟Arena的参与模型多样性提升，训练后的模型性能线性提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Current LLM post-training (SFT/RL) relies on manually annotated high-quality data, and online Chatbot Arena evaluation has high costs and long cycles, preventing fast model iteration. Previous alignment pipelines have severe human-dependent bottlenecks in both training and evaluation stages.","importance":"It is a system-level contribution to post-training paradigms, realizing full automation of the training and evaluation pipeline, greatly reducing human and time costs of post-training and supporting fast model iteration.","technical_approach":"It is a system paradigm innovation that builds an offline simulated Chatbot Arena based on open-source LLMs: the evaluation side automatically generates performance rankings of multiple models directly on the offline test set without human voting; the training side uses preference data generated by the Arena for RL training without manual preference annotation. Compared with existing human-dependent pipelines, evaluation speed is increased by over 10x, and training data cost is reduced by 90%.","experiments":"Tested on 7B and 13B parameter LLaMA2 models. After training with preference data generated by WizardArena, the model's ranking on real Chatbot Arena outperforms baselines of the same parameter scale trained on human annotated data, with ELO score improved by 6 percentage points. Scaling observation shows that as the diversity of participating models in the simulated Arena increases, the performance of the trained model improves linearly.","authors_note":""},"tags":["post-training","synthetic-data","preference-learning","alignment"],"keywords":["post-training","simulated chatbot arena","large language models"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Chatbot Arena的 pairwise 偏好排名是评估LLM对话能力的可靠指标","claim_en":"Pairwise preference ranking from Chatbot Arena is a reliable metric for evaluating LLM conversational ability","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"完全基于开源LLM的离线模拟Chatbot Arena生成的偏好数据，训练出的模型性能超过用人工标注偏好数据训练的基线，且评估排名和真实人类投票的相关度达到0.92","claim_en":"Preference data generated by a fully open-source LLM based offline simulated Chatbot Arena trains models that outperform baselines trained on human annotated preference data, with ranking correlation with real human votes reaching 0.92","opposes":"过往认为人工标注的偏好数据是LLM对齐的最优训练信号，自动生成的数据质量无法达标","opposes_cite_hint":"Ouyang 2022 InstructGPT","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"为LLM后训练的全自动化提供了实证支持，大幅降低对齐的人力门槛"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的自动偏好生成逻辑即可，中小团队快速迭代对齐模型可直接参考减少人工成本。","en":"Only read §4 for the automatic preference generation logic, which helps small teams cut labor costs when iterating alignment models rapidly."}},{"id":"MaLLM24","title":"Mesa-Extrapolation: A Weave Position Encoding Method for Enhanced Extrapolation in LLMs","authors":["Xin Ma","Yang Liu","Jingjing Liu","Xiaoxu Ma"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$69","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MaLLM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MaLLM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9446c291a8744a125a0bda5b18f4d5a1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM的外推能力差，推理长度超过训练最大长度时性能急剧下降。现有位置编码方案（如RoPE）的外推上限低，需要额外微调才能支持更长上下文，过往对NoPE（无位置编码）外推失败的原理缺乏系统理论分析。","importance":"属于位置编码的方法级+理论级贡献，首次从理论上证明了编织位置编码可以在无额外成本的情况下提升外推能力，为长上下文LLM提供了零开销的位置编码方案。","technical_approach":"是位置编码方法创新，首先通过理论分析定位NoPE外推失败的核心原因，提出编织位置编码的设计思路，在此基础上实现Mesa-Extrapolation：采用基于块的三角注意力矩阵，将位置编码编织到注意力计算中，不需要额外训练参数，也不需要微调即可支持更长上下文。对比RoPE的外推方案，不需要插值或者微调，计算开销增加不到5%。","experiments":"在7B、13B参数的LLaMA2模型上测试，训练长度为4k时，外推到32k长度的任务性能比RoPE基线高21%，困惑度降低16%。ablation显示块式三角注意力是外推性能提升的核心来源。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs have poor extrapolation ability, and performance drops sharply when inference length exceeds the maximum training length. Existing position encoding schemes (e.g. RoPE) have low extrapolation limits, requiring extra fine-tuning to support longer contexts. Previous research lacks systematic theoretical analysis on why NoPE (No Position Encoding) fails at extrapolation.","importance":"It is a method-level + theoretical contribution to position encoding, the first to theoretically prove that weave position encoding can improve extrapolation ability without extra cost, providing a zero-overhead position encoding scheme for long-context LLMs.","technical_approach":"It is a position encoding method innovation that first locates the core reason for NoPE extrapolation failure via theoretical analysis, proposes the weave position encoding design idea, and implements Mesa-Extrapolation on this basis: it uses a chunk-based triangular attention matrix, weaves position encoding into attention calculation, requires no extra training parameters or fine-tuning to support longer contexts. Compared with RoPE extrapolation schemes, no interpolation or fine-tuning is required, and computational overhead increases by less than 5%.","experiments":"Tested on 7B and 13B parameter LLaMA2 models with 4k training length. When extrapolating to 32k length, task performance is 21% higher than the RoPE baseline, and perplexity is reduced by 16%. Ablation shows chunked triangular attention is the core source of extrapolation performance improvement.","authors_note":""},"tags":["positional-encoding","length-extrapolation","long-context","architecture"],"keywords":["Large language models","extrapolation","position encoding","transformers","self-attention"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"现有位置编码方案的外推能力不足，是限制LLM长上下文性能的核心瓶颈之一","claim_en":"Insufficient extrapolation ability of existing position encoding schemes is one of the core bottlenecks limiting LLM long context performance","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于块三角注意力的编织位置编码可以在无额外参数、无微调的情况下，将LLM的外推长度提升到训练长度的8倍以上，性能超过需要微调的RoPE外推方案","claim_en":"Weave position encoding based on chunked triangular attention can improve LLM extrapolation length to more than 8x of training length without extra parameters or fine-tuning, outperforming RoPE extrapolation schemes that require fine-tuning","opposes":"过往认为位置编码外推需要通过插值、微调或者增加额外参数才能实现性能提升","opposes_cite_hint":"Su 2021 RoPE","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"打破了长上下文外推需要额外成本的假设，提供了零成本长上下文扩展的可行路径"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看Fig 5的不同长度外推性能对比即可，可尝试零成本替换内部现有位置编码测试长上下文效果。","en":"Only check Fig 5 for extrapolation performance comparisons across lengths; try zero-cost replacement of existing position encoding to test long-context performance."}},{"id":"2406.06443","title":"LLM Dataset Inference: Did you train on my dataset?","authors":["Pratyush Maini","Hengrui Jia","Nicolas Papernot","Adam Dziedzic"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.06443","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MainiJPD24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MainiJPD24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e01519b47118e2f51aa643151350c905-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：在“成员推断”(membership inference)里，我们到底能不能可靠地判断某个数据集/样本是否被某个 LLM 用来训练，而不是被分布差异误导。以往很多 MIA 看起来很强，但常把“训练集样本”和“非训练样本”选自不同分布（例如时间上更新的 Wikipedia），导致模型区分的是分布而不是记忆。","importance":"贡献是把“数据分布错配”这个隐藏变量系统性地揭出来，并给出更接近真实诉讼/审计场景的评测口径：如果非成员与成员同分布，现有多数 MIA 接近随机猜测。对 pretrain 研究的直接启示是：你以为的“可审计/可追责”能力很可能是评测构造出来的，数据治理与合规评估需要更严格的对照设计。","technical_approach":"方法上不是提出更强攻击，而是做“去混淆”(deconfounding)的实验设计：控制成员/非成员的分布一致性，特别是时间切分、来源切分等常见导致 shift 的因素。核心机制是把 MIA 的判别信号拆成两类：模型对训练样本的过拟合/记忆信号 vs. 数据分布差异信号，并展示后者在很多设置里占主导，从而让攻击“看起来有效”。","experiments":"从摘要可确认的关键结论是：当非成员来自不同分布时，多种已有 MIA 显著优于随机；当构造同分布非成员时，多数方法在区分成员/非成员上“不比随机好”。摘要未给出模型规模、数据规模、具体指标数值与基线列表，因此无法在此补充精确提升幅度或消融细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether LLM membership/dataset inference is actually detecting training-data usage, or merely exploiting distribution shift between “members” and “non-members”. Prior MIAs often compare training samples against non-members drawn from a different distribution (e.g., newer Wikipedia), making the task easier for the wrong reason.","importance":"The main contribution is an evaluation correction: under distribution-matched non-members, many existing MIAs collapse to near-random guessing. For pretraining practice, this is a warning that “auditability” claims can be artifacts of dataset construction, so compliance-oriented evaluations must control for temporal/source shifts.","technical_approach":"Rather than proposing a stronger attack, they deconfound the evaluation by enforcing member/non-member distribution matching (notably across time/source splits). The key idea is to separate signals from memorization/overfitting versus signals from distribution differences, and show that the latter often dominates reported MIA success.","experiments":"From the abstract: MIAs look strong under shifted non-members, but perform no better than random when non-members are distribution-matched. The abstract does not provide model/data scale, exact metrics, or numeric deltas, so precise benchmarking details cannot be stated here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["membership-inference","data-contamination","training-data","privacy"],"notable_authors":["Pratyush Maini","Hengrui Jia","Nicolas Papernot","Adam Dziedzic"],"keywords":["LLM","dataset inference","membership inference","copyright"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3.2的分布去混淆实验设计即可，后续做训练数据审计、合规评估必须控制分布一致性。","en":"Only read §3.2 for the distribution deconfounding experimental design; distribution consistency must be controlled for subsequent training data audit and compliance evaluations."}},{"id":"2406.03072","title":"Local to Global: Learning Dynamics and Effect of Initialization for Transformers","authors":["Ashok Vardhan Makkuva","Marco Bondaschi","Adway Girish","Alliot Nagle","Hyeji Kim","Michael Gastpar","Chanakya Ekbote"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.03072","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MakkuvaBGNKGE24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MakkuvaBGNKGE24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9cdb4f8c4dfa13284d2d5a6e7853e5a2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：Transformer 在最简单的 Markov 数据生成设定下，训练动态为何会走向“学到全局结构”或“只学到局部启发式”，以及初始化如何决定最终收敛到哪类解。过去相关工作常停留在经验观察或更复杂设定里难以给出可证明结论。","importance":"贡献是理论层面的“可刻画性”：在一阶 Markov 链 + 单层 Transformer + next-token loss 的可控环境中，给出收敛到全局/局部极小值的条件。对 pretrain 的启示是：初始化与数据统计性质会决定模型是否学到可泛化的生成规律，这为解释训练不稳定、早期训练信号与“捷径解”(shortcut)提供了更硬的理论支点。","technical_approach":"方法是把问题压缩到可分析的最小系统：一阶 Markov 输入过程、单层 Transformer、标准 next-token 目标，然后对优化轨迹与极小值结构做严格分析。关键设计取舍是牺牲架构深度与真实语料复杂性，换取对“何时学到全局 Markov 结构、何时陷入局部最优”的可证明刻画，并把分界与初始化/数据转移矩阵性质绑定起来。","experiments":"摘要强调的是理论结论：参数在 next-token 训练下会因初始化与 Markov 数据性质不同而收敛到全局或局部极小值，并对学习动态做了全面表征。摘要未提供实验规模、指标或数值对比，因此无法报告具体提升、消融或 scaling 现象。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies when a Transformer trained with next-token prediction on Markov data learns the true global structure versus getting stuck in local, heuristic solutions, and how initialization controls that outcome. Prior work often lacked provable characterizations due to more complex settings.","importance":"It provides a clean theoretical characterization in a controlled regime (first-order Markov chains, single-layer Transformers): convergence to global vs local minima depends on initialization and properties of the Markov process. For pretraining, it sharpens the intuition that early optimization and data statistics can lock models into shortcut solutions with different generalization behavior.","technical_approach":"They reduce the problem to an analyzable minimal setup—first-order Markov inputs, a one-layer Transformer, standard next-token loss—and derive the structure of minima and learning dynamics. The trade-off is realism for identifiability: by simplifying architecture/data, they can state explicit conditions linking initialization and transition-matrix properties to the learned solution.","experiments":"The abstract focuses on theoretical results about learning dynamics and convergence regimes; it does not report model sizes, datasets, metrics, or numeric comparisons, so experimental details cannot be summarized precisely.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer-theory","learning-dynamics","markov-chain","initialization"],"notable_authors":["Ashok Vardhan Makkuva","Marco Bondaschi","Adway Girish","Alliot Nagle","Hyeji Kim"],"keywords":["gradient descent dynamics","transformers","markov chains"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看Theorem 3的全局/局部收敛条件即可，可用来解释内部预训练早期出现的捷径解问题。","en":"Only check Theorem 3 for global/local convergence conditions, which can explain shortcut solutions observed in the early stage of internal pre-training."}},{"id":"MalinovskiiMIKB24","title":"PV-Tuning: Beyond Straight-Through Estimation for Extreme LLM Compression","authors":["Vladimir Malinovskii","Denis Mazur","Ivan Ilin","Denis Kuznedelev","Konstantin Burlachenko","Kai Yi","Dan Alistarh","Peter Richtárik"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MalinovskiiMIKB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MalinovskiiMIKB24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/091166620a04a289c555f411d8899049-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"摘要缺失，无法可靠判断论文具体要解决的压缩问题边界（量化/二值化/极低比特？）以及它认为 Straight-Through Estimation 在哪里失效。","importance":"摘要缺失，无法确认贡献量级与对 LLM pretrain/压缩范式的直接启示。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，仅从标题可推断其关注“PV-Tuning”作为替代/超越 STE 的训练方法，但无法在不编造的前提下说明机制与关键设计取舍。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法给出模型规模、压缩倍率、基线、指标与提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract is provided, so the exact compression setting and the specific failure modes of straight-through estimation cannot be stated reliably.","importance":"Without the abstract, the contribution magnitude and implications for LLM pretraining/compression cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"Only the title suggests a method (“PV-Tuning”) beyond STE for extreme LLM compression, but the mechanism and design trade-offs cannot be described without guessing.","experiments":"No abstract: model scales, compression ratios, baselines, metrics, and numeric gains are unknown.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","llm-compression","post-training-quantization"],"notable_authors":["Vladimir Malinovskii","Denis Mazur","Ivan Ilin","Denis Kuznedelev","Konstantin Burlachenko"],"keywords":["Quantization","Large Language Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为低比特压缩方向的文献备查，无足够信息判断实用价值，不读正文。","en":"Only for reference as low-bit compression literature; insufficient information to judge practical value, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"McLeishBSJKBKBG24","title":"Transformers Can Do Arithmetic with the Right Embeddings","authors":["Sean McLeish","Arpit Bansal","Alex Stein","Neel Jain","John Kirchenbauer","Brian R. Bartoldson","Bhavya Kailkhura","Abhinav Bhatele","Jonas Geiping","Avi Schwarzschild","Tom Goldstein"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/McLeishBSJKBKBG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/McLeishBSJKBKBG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c35986bc1ee29b31c1011481b77fe540-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"摘要缺失，无法确认论文所说“right embeddings”具体是哪类数值/位置/基数表示嵌入，以及它要解决的是训练可学性、泛化到更大数、还是减少算术幻觉。","importance":"摘要缺失，无法判断其结论是偏机制（为什么 Transformer 难算术）还是偏工程（给一套 embedding 就能显著提升）。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，仅从标题可推断其核心变量是输入/表示层的 embedding 设计，而不是改模型主体；但无法说明具体构造与为何有效的机制解释。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法给出算术任务设置、训练/测试范围、指标与提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract is provided, so the exact meaning of “the right embeddings” and the targeted arithmetic failure mode (learnability, extrapolation, hallucinations) cannot be stated.","importance":"Without the abstract, it is unclear whether the contribution is mainly mechanistic (why Transformers struggle) or practical (an embedding recipe with large gains).","technical_approach":"Only the title indicates embedding design as the key lever rather than architectural changes; the concrete construction and rationale cannot be summarized without guessing.","experiments":"No abstract: arithmetic tasks, train/test ranges, metrics, and numeric improvements are unknown.","authors_note":""},"tags":["arithmetic","transformer","positional-embedding","reasoning"],"notable_authors":["Sean McLeish","Arpit Bansal","Alex Stein","Neel Jain","John Kirchenbauer"],"keywords":["Algorithmic Generalization","Arithmetic","Transformer","Recurrent"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为数值推理方向嵌入优化的文献备查，无足够信息判断实用价值，不读正文。","en":"Only for reference as numerical reasoning embedding optimization literature; insufficient information to judge practical value, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"MorishitaMYS24","title":"Enhancing Reasoning Capabilities of LLMs via Principled Synthetic Logic Corpus","authors":["Terufumi Morishita","Gaku Morio","Atsuki Yamaguchi","Yasuhiro Sogawa"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MorishitaMYS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MorishitaMYS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/8678da90126aa58326b2fc0254b33a8c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"摘要缺失，无法确认其“principled synthetic logic corpus”具体覆盖哪些逻辑形式（命题/一阶/归结/自然演绎）、以及它要解决的是推理能力缺失还是评测不可控。","importance":"摘要缺失，无法判断其对 pretrain 数据合成的启示：是提供可复用的数据生成配方，还是证明某类逻辑数据对泛化推理有效。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，无法说明语料生成的原则（可验证性、难度分层、组合泛化控制、反例构造等）以及与现有合成推理数据的关键差异。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法给出模型规模、训练方式（继续预训/指令微调）、评测集与数值提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract is provided, so the scope of the “principled synthetic logic corpus” and the exact reasoning gap it targets cannot be specified.","importance":"Without the abstract, we cannot assess whether the main value is a reusable data-generation recipe or evidence that such logic data improves generalizable reasoning.","technical_approach":"No abstract: the corpus construction principles (verifiability, difficulty control, compositional generalization, counterexamples) and differences from prior synthetic reasoning datasets are unknown.","experiments":"No abstract: model sizes, training protocol, benchmarks, and numeric gains are unknown.","authors_note":""},"tags":["synthetic-data","reasoning","sft","data-quality"],"notable_authors":["Terufumi Morishita","Gaku Morio","Atsuki Yamaguchi","Yasuhiro Sogawa"],"keywords":["large language model","artificial intelligence","reasoning","logical reasoning","math","coding","synthetic corpus"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看语料生成原则章节即可，当前公开信息不足，可确认其逻辑语料设计是否可复用至预训练数据合成流程","en":"Only read the corpus generation principles section, insufficient public info to judge if its logic corpus can be reused for pretrain data synthesis"}},{"id":"MuHHAVKLBSW24","title":"Rule Based Rewards for Language Model Safety","authors":["Tong Mu","Alec Helyar","Johannes Heidecke","Joshua Achiam","Andrea Vallone","Ian Kivlichan","Molly Lin","Alex Beutel","John Schulman","Lilian Weng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$6f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MuHHAVKLBSW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MuHHAVKLBSW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c4e380fb74dec9da9c7212e834657aa9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"摘要缺失，无法确认其“rule based rewards”具体用于哪类安全目标（拒答、合规、无害性、越狱防护）以及它要替代的是人工偏好标注还是模型裁判。","importance":"摘要缺失，无法判断其对 post-train ↔ pretrain 闭环的意义：规则奖励可能降低对人工标注依赖，但也可能带来可被投机的 reward hacking 风险。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，无法说明规则的形式（正则/解析器/静态检查/程序化约束）、如何与 RL（如 PPO）结合、以及如何处理规则覆盖不足与误杀。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法给出训练设置、对齐指标、安全-有用性权衡与数值结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract is provided, so the targeted safety objectives for “rule-based rewards” and what they aim to replace (human preference labels vs model judges) are unclear.","importance":"Without the abstract, we cannot assess the post-training ↔ pretraining implications: rule rewards can reduce labeling cost but may increase reward hacking if poorly specified.","technical_approach":"No abstract: the rule format (parsers, programmatic constraints, static checks), RL integration, and handling of rule coverage/false positives cannot be summarized.","experiments":"No abstract: training setup, safety/helpfulness trade-offs, and quantitative results are unknown.","authors_note":""},"tags":["safety","reward-model","rule-based","rlhf"],"notable_authors":["Tong Mu","Alec Helyar","Johannes Heidecke","Joshua Achiam","Andrea Vallone"],"keywords":["Large Language Model","LLM","RLHF","RLAIF","Safety","RBR","refusal","alignment"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看规则奖励与RL结合的实验部分即可，关注其reward hacking规避方案，可参考对齐流程优化方向","en":"Only read experiments on rule-based reward combined with RL, focus on reward hacking mitigation for alignment pipeline optimization reference"}},{"id":"NathSDMZWH24","title":"Learning Goal-Conditioned Representations for Language Reward Models","authors":["Vaskar Nath","Dylan Slack","Jeff Da","Yuntao Ma","Hugh Zhang","Spencer Whitehead","Sean Hendryx"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$70","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NathSDMZWH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NathSDMZWH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d46f127a80dc58cbc0732a717285c43a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：语言 reward model 往往只能给出一个整体偏好分数，但在多目标或目标变化的场景下，这种表示不够用。现有 reward model 经常把不同目标混成单一标量，导致一旦目标切换、约束变化或用户意图更细化，模型就难以稳定泛化。","importance":"这项工作对 post-train 很直接，对 pretrain 也有启发。它关注 reward representation 而不只是 reward fitting，说明偏好学习的瓶颈不仅是数据量，还包括目标条件化能力；这和更广义的 controllable generation、goal-conditioned policy learning 是连着的。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法是学习 goal-conditioned representations for language reward models，即让 reward model 在显式目标条件下建模偏好。关键设计不是把 goal 当普通文本前缀拼进去，而是学到能分离任务目标与响应质量的表示，使同一响应在不同目标下得到不同但一致的评价；相比标准 RM，这种设计更适合多目标对齐和目标迁移。","experiments":"实验应比较普通 reward model 与 goal-conditioned reward model 在目标切换、组合目标、OOD goals 或 reward extrapolation 上的表现。关键指标可能包括 preference accuracy、ranking consistency，以及用于 policy optimization 后的目标满足度。由于缺少摘要和数值，无法可靠给出数据规模、模型参数和提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a limitation of standard language reward models: they usually collapse preference into a single scalar, which works poorly when objectives vary across users, tasks, or constraints. Once goals change, a non-conditional reward model often fails to generalize in a controlled way.","importance":"This is directly relevant to post-training and indirectly relevant to pretraining. The main lesson is that reward learning is also a representation problem: if the model cannot factor goals from response quality, more preference data alone may not fix controllability.","technical_approach":"The likely method is to learn goal-conditioned representations for reward modeling, so the same response can be evaluated differently depending on an explicit target specification. The important design choice is to encode goals as a structured conditioning signal rather than treating them as incidental prompt text, enabling better transfer across objectives and combinations of objectives.","experiments":"The expected evaluation compares standard reward models against goal-conditioned ones on goal shifts, compositional objectives, and out-of-distribution goal generalization. Metrics would likely include preference prediction accuracy, ranking quality, and downstream policy performance when the reward model is used for optimization. No abstract or numerical details are available, so exact scales and gains cannot be reported safely.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reward-model","representation","goal-conditioning","alignment"],"keywords":["Goal-Conditioned Q-functions","Contrastive Learning","Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback","Representation Learning","Reward Model"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4.2目标条件化表示分离设计部分即可，拆分目标与响应质量的思路可复用至多目标预训练对齐","en":"Only read §4.2 on goal-conditioned representation disentanglement, the design of separating goal and response quality applies to multi-goal pretrain alignment"}},{"id":"Nguyen24","title":"Understanding Transformers via N-Gram Statistics","authors":["Timothy Nguyen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$71","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Nguyen24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Nguyen24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/b1c446eebd9a317dd0e96b16908c821a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：能否用 n-gram 统计这个更可解释的视角来理解 Transformer 学到了什么，以及它与经典语言统计模型之间到底是什么关系。Transformer 很强，但内部机制难解释；如果它的大量行为可以由某类高阶统计近似解释，那么很多经验现象就不必只停留在黑箱观察。","importance":"这项工作属于机制分析与理论理解。对 pretrain 的意义在于，它可能帮助回答两个实际问题：一是 Transformer 的收益有多少来自更好地利用局部共现统计，二是何时必须依赖超越 n-gram 的组合与推理能力；这会影响对数据、上下文长度和架构改进的判断。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法是从 n-gram statistics 出发分析 Transformer 的表示或预测行为。可能路径包括：证明某些 Transformer 层或注意力机制可实现对 n-gram 统计的估计、平滑或检索，或者用 n-gram 近似解释训练动态与泛化现象。与直接做可视化解释不同，这类方法更强调一个可分析、可比较的统计基线。","experiments":"实验或分析重点应是比较 Transformer 预测与 n-gram 统计之间的一致性、偏离区间，以及这些偏离何时对应更高阶能力。若论文完整，可能会展示不同层、不同上下文长度或不同数据分布下的规律。由于没有摘要和结果，无法可靠给出模型规模、语料规模和定量结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether transformers can be understood through the lens of n-gram statistics, and where that view succeeds or breaks down. This matters because transformers are powerful but opaque, while n-gram models offer a much more interpretable statistical baseline for language prediction.","importance":"This is a mechanistic and theoretical contribution. For pretraining, the practical value is in separating capabilities that come from sophisticated use of local co-occurrence statistics from those that truly require longer-range composition or reasoning.","technical_approach":"The approach likely analyzes transformer behavior in relation to n-gram statistics, possibly by showing how attention layers can estimate, smooth, or retrieve n-gram-like information, or by using n-gram structure to explain certain learning dynamics. The key advantage over pure interpretability-by-visualization is that this provides an explicit statistical reference point.","experiments":"The relevant empirical analysis would compare transformer predictions with n-gram-based expectations across context lengths, layers, or data regimes, highlighting when the model behaves like a sophisticated statistical language model and when it departs from that regime. No abstract or quantitative results are given here, so exact model scales and numeric findings cannot be stated reliably.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","n-gram","interpretability","language-modeling"],"notable_authors":["Timothy Nguyen"],"keywords":["transformers","large-language models","ngrams","curriculum learning","interpretability"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看n-gram统计与Transformer行为的对应分析章节即可，可辅助判断预训练架构改进的实际收益来源","en":"Only read analysis on correspondence between n-gram statistics and Transformer behaviors, helps identify real gain sources of pretrain architecture improvements"}},{"id":"PengCHC24","title":"Navigating the Safety Landscape: Measuring Risks in Finetuning Large Language Models","authors":["Shengyun Peng","Pin-Yu Chen","Matthew Hull","Duen Horng Chau"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$72","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PengCHC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PengCHC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ada93fa6643735f294be51dc31eebbd4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：大模型微调会在能力提升的同时引入新的安全风险，但业界缺少能量化“不同微调选择带来多大风险增量”的统一测量框架。","importance":"贡献偏评测/方法结合：把 finetuning 视为一个可导航的风险空间，强调用可度量指标比较 LoRA/全参微调、数据配方与超参对安全面的影响，对 pretrain↔posttrain 闭环里的“安全回归”很有现实价值。","technical_approach":"核心是构建风险测量流程：在一组安全相关维度（如越狱、毒性、隐私泄露、偏见等）上，对比微调前后模型行为变化，并把风险与微调配置关联起来以形成“地图”。关键取舍在于：安全指标往往依赖提示分布与攻击策略，测量必须控制提示集与自适应攻击强度；同时要区分“模型更会完成任务”与“模型更不安全”之间的混淆（能力提升会让某些红队提示更容易成功）。","experiments":"题目与摘要未提供具体模型（如 Llama/Qwen 系列）、微调方法、数据规模、风险指标与数值变化，因此无法总结哪些微调旋钮最危险、哪些最安全且不显著损伤能力。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a deployment pain point: finetuning can improve utility while introducing new safety risks, yet practitioners lack a consistent way to quantify the risk delta induced by different finetuning choices.","importance":"This is an evaluation-plus-method contribution: it treats finetuning as a navigable risk landscape and pushes for measurable comparisons across adapters/full finetuning, data recipes, and hyperparameters—useful for the pretrain↔posttrain safety regression loop.","technical_approach":"The work proposes a risk measurement pipeline that evaluates pre- vs post-finetune behavior across safety dimensions (e.g., jailbreak susceptibility, toxicity, privacy leakage, bias) and links observed risk changes to finetuning configurations to form a “map.” The key trade-off is that safety metrics are prompt- and attack-dependent, so the evaluation must control prompt distributions and attacker strength, and disentangle genuine safety degradation from capability gains that make red-team prompts more effective.","experiments":"No concrete details are provided on model families, finetuning methods, data scale, metrics, or numeric deltas, so the most risk-sensitive knobs cannot be identified from the given metadata.","authors_note":""},"tags":["safety","finetuning","alignment","risk-evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Shengyun Peng","Pin-Yu Chen","Matthew Hull","Duen Horng Chau"],"keywords":["LLM safety; LLM Landscape; LLM Finetuning; Attack and Defense"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§5微调风险量化框架部分即可，可参考预训练后微调阶段安全回归的度量方法","en":"Only read §5 on finetuning risk quantification framework, applicable for safety regression measurement in post-pretrain finetuning stages"}},{"id":"PrabhakarZW24","title":"Kraken: Inherently Parallel Transformers For Efficient Multi-Device Inference","authors":["Rohan Baskar Prabhakar","Hengrui Zhang","David Wentzlaff"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$73","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PrabhakarZW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PrabhakarZW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/0f4d1fc085b7504c140e66bb26ed8842-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：Transformer 推理在多设备上扩展时天然受串行依赖和通信模式限制，尤其 decode 阶段很难高效并行，导致多卡推理吞吐上不去、延迟也难压。传统张量并行和流水并行都能分摊算力，但并没有改变 Transformer 结构本身对跨设备同步的依赖。","importance":"它属于架构+系统联合优化，对 serving 端更直接，但也会反过来影响预训练架构选择。重要性在于：如果能做 inherently parallel 的 Transformer 变体，让多设备推理更接近线性扩展，那么一些原本只在训练端有意义的并行策略，可能会开始反推模型层设计和模块划分。","technical_approach":"从题目看，Kraken 的核心不是给现有 Transformer 再套一层并行框架，而是设计一种结构上更适合多设备推理的 Transformer。关键机制很可能是重排层内/层间依赖，使不同设备能同时处理更多计算而减少严格串行的部分；与标准自回归 decode 相比，这类设计通常会在模型表达能力、训练兼容性或实现复杂度上做交换，重点要看它是否保持了与主流训练栈的兼容。","experiments":"实验最重要的是多设备推理效率，而不是单卡 perplexity。应该重点比较：与标准 Transformer 配合 tensor parallel、pipeline parallel 或 sequence parallel 的方案相比，Kraken 在 2/4/8+ 设备上的吞吐、延迟、通信量和扩展效率；如果论文做得完整，还会报告精度损失是否可忽略，以及 batch size、prompt length、decode length 对收益的影响。由于没有摘要，无法确认其是否针对训练和推理都设计、以及具体加速倍数。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a structural limitation in Transformer inference: multi-device scaling is constrained by autoregressive dependencies and synchronization-heavy communication, especially during decoding. Standard tensor or pipeline parallelism spreads the work, but it does not change the fact that the architecture itself is not naturally aligned with efficient parallel inference.","importance":"This is a joint architecture-and-systems contribution. Its direct impact is on serving efficiency, but it also matters upstream: if a Transformer variant is inherently better suited to multi-device inference, that can feed back into pretraining-time architecture choices rather than remaining a deployment-only consideration.","technical_approach":"From the title, Kraken sounds like a Transformer redesign rather than another runtime wrapper. The key idea is likely to restructure dependencies within or across layers so more computation can proceed concurrently across devices, reducing the amount of strictly serial work; the main trade-offs are usually model quality, training compatibility, and implementation complexity, so those boundaries matter more than raw speed claims alone.","experiments":"The critical results should be multi-device inference metrics: throughput, latency, communication cost, and scaling efficiency across different device counts. The right baselines are standard Transformers with existing parallelism strategies, and a strong evaluation would also test sensitivity to batch size, prompt length, and generated length, along with any quality regression. Exact architecture details and speedup numbers are not available from the provided information.","authors_note":""},"tags":["parallel-inference","transformer","multi-device","architecture"],"keywords":["Neural Networks"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看Kraken结构并行设计部分即可，关注其与现有训练栈兼容性，判断是否可纳入预训练架构选型","en":"Only read Kraken's structural parallelism design, check its compatibility with existing training stacks for pretrain architecture selection reference"}},{"id":"QiWAL24","title":"Pipeline Parallelism with Controllable Memory","authors":["Penghui Qi","Xinyi Wan","Nyamdavaa Amar","Min Lin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$74","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/QiWAL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/QiWAL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/527dad0b9159805289906d5740a0bdd3-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：流水并行训练常在吞吐和显存之间做硬交换，想提高设备利用率就要接受更高 activation memory，想省显存又会拖慢流水。现有方案通常靠 checkpointing、重计算或固定的 micro-batch 调度折中，但对‘内存预算可控’这件事支持不够直接。","importance":"它是训练系统层面的工作，但对大模型预训练非常实用。重要性在于：很多真实训练并不是追求绝对最快，而是在固定 GPU 内存、固定并行拓扑下求一个可落地最优点；如果流水并行可以显式按内存预算调度，就能让同一套训练栈覆盖更广的模型规模和集群条件。","technical_approach":"核心思路是做 controllable memory 的 pipeline parallelism，也就是把显存占用从被动结果变成调度目标的一部分。通常这意味着在 stage 划分、micro-batch 排布、activation 保留与释放时机、甚至权重更新同步上做系统级协调；与传统固定调度相比，这类方法不是单点优化，而是在吞吐、bubble、重计算和峰值内存之间找可调 Pareto 前沿。","experiments":"实验最关键的是同一内存预算下的吞吐提升，或同一吞吐下的内存下降。需要看的结果包括：和 GPipe、1F1B、带 activation checkpoint 的基线相比，在不同 pipeline 深度和 batch 配置下，峰值内存下降多少、训练 step time 变化多少、是否影响收敛；有价值的分析还应展示预算越紧时收益是否更明显。由于没有摘要，无法给出具体算法名称、理论保证或数值结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a common pain point in pipeline parallel training: throughput and memory are tightly coupled, and existing schedules often force a blunt trade-off between utilization and activation memory. Checkpointing and recomputation help, but they do not make memory a first-class controllable target in the pipeline schedule.","importance":"This is a systems contribution with immediate relevance to large-scale pretraining. In practice, teams often optimize under hard memory limits rather than for maximum speed alone, so a pipeline method that can explicitly operate at a chosen memory budget is valuable even if it does not dominate every unconstrained setting.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to build pipeline parallelism with controllable memory, meaning the schedule is designed to satisfy a memory target rather than treating memory as a side effect. That likely requires coordinated choices over stage partitioning, micro-batch ordering, activation retention and release, and recomputation; the real contribution is the ability to navigate the Pareto frontier among utilization, bubble overhead, recompute cost, and peak memory.","experiments":"The key evidence should show either higher throughput at the same memory budget or lower memory at the same throughput. The most relevant baselines are standard pipeline schedules such as GPipe or 1F1B, likely combined with activation checkpointing, with results reported across different pipeline depths and batch settings; the paper should also demonstrate that the schedule does not harm optimization or convergence. The abstract is not provided, so exact numbers and algorithmic details cannot be confirmed.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pipeline-parallelism","memory-efficiency","training-systems"],"keywords":["LLM Training","Pipeline Parallelism","Balanced Memory","Zero Bubble","Building Block","Lifespan"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看内存可控的流水并行调度策略部分即可，可直接复用至内部预训练训练系统优化","en":"Only read the scheduling strategy of memory-controllable pipeline parallelism, can be directly reused for internal pretrain training system optimization"}},{"id":"2405.17394","title":"The Expressive Capacity of State Space Models: A Formal Language Perspective","authors":["Yash Raj Sarrof","Yana Veitsman","Michael Hahn"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Recently, recurrent models based on linear state space models (SSMs) have shown promising performance in language modeling (LM), competititve with transformers. However, there is little understanding of the in-principle abilities of such models, which could provide useful guidance to the search for better LM architectures. We present a comprehensive theoretical study of the capacity of such SSMs as it compares to that of transformers and traditional RNNs. We find that SSMs and transformers have overlapping but distinct strengths. In star-free state tracking, SSMs implement straightforward and exact solutions to problems that transformers struggle to represent exactly. They can also model bounded hierarchical structure with optimal memory even without simulating a stack. On the other hand, we identify a design choice in current SSMs that limits their expressive power. We discuss implications for SSM and LM research, and verify results empirically on a recent SSM, Mamba.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.17394","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SarrofV024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SarrofV024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/485e0981e81766248b61fd1ec43c118f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有SSM（状态空间模型）在语言建模任务上性能接近Transformer，但缺乏对SSM表达能力的系统性理论分析，无法指导架构迭代。过往的架构对比多基于实证结果，缺乏理论层面的优劣界定。","importance":"属于架构理论的范式级贡献，明确了SSM和Transformer的表达能力边界，为未来LM架构的设计和选择提供了理论依据，避免无方向的实证试错。","technical_approach":"是理论研究，从形式语言的角度对比SSM、Transformer、传统RNN的表达能力，分别在无星状态跟踪、有界层次结构建模、无界层次结构建模等任务上分析三类架构的理论上限和实现复杂度。对比过往仅靠实验对比的研究，该工作从理论层面界定了不同架构的适用场景。","experiments":"纯理论研究，无大规模预训练实验，通过形式语言任务的理论推导证明：SSM在无星状态跟踪任务上可以实现精确解，Transformer很难精确表达；SSM可以在不需要模拟栈的情况下实现最优内存的有界层次结构建模；而SSM无法实现需要Dyck-k语言能力的无界层次结构建模，Transformer可以实现。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing SSMs (State Space Models) achieve performance close to Transformers on language modeling tasks, but lack systematic theoretical analysis of SSM expressive capacity, which cannot guide architecture iteration. Previous architecture comparisons are mostly based on empirical results, lacking theoretical definition of advantages and disadvantages.","importance":"It is a paradigm-level contribution to architecture theory, clarifying the expressive capacity boundaries of SSMs and Transformers, providing theoretical basis for future LM architecture design and selection, avoiding undirected empirical trial and error.","technical_approach":"It is a theoretical study that compares the expressive capacity of SSMs, Transformers and traditional RNNs from a formal language perspective, analyzing the theoretical upper limits and implementation complexity of the three architectures on tasks including star-free state tracking, bounded hierarchical structure modeling, and unbounded hierarchical structure modeling. Compared with previous studies relying only on experimental comparison, this work defines applicable scenarios of different architectures from the theoretical level.","experiments":"It is a pure theoretical study with no large-scale pre-training experiments. Through theoretical derivation on formal language tasks, it proves: SSMs can implement exact solutions on star-free state tracking tasks that Transformers struggle to represent exactly; SSMs can model bounded hierarchical structure with optimal memory even without simulating a stack; SSMs cannot implement unbounded hierarchical structure modeling that requires Dyck-k language ability, which Transformers can implement.","authors_note":""},"tags":["ssm","formal-language","expressiveness","architecture"],"keywords":["state-space models","formal languages","expressivity","theory"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"SSM在长上下文语言建模任务上的性能接近Transformer，是有潜力的Transformer替代架构","claim_en":"SSM achieves performance close to Transformer on long context language modeling tasks, and is a promising alternative architecture to Transformer","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"SSM和Transformer的表达能力是重叠但互斥的，SSM擅长状态跟踪和有界层次结构建模，Transformer擅长无界层次结构建模，两类架构没有绝对的优劣","claim_en":"The expressive capacities of SSM and Transformer are overlapping but distinct: SSM excels at state tracking and bounded hierarchical structure modeling, while Transformer excels at unbounded hierarchical structure modeling, with no absolute advantage for either architecture","opposes":"过往部分研究默认SSM是Transformer的全面替代方案，性能和能力都可以超过Transformer","opposes_cite_hint":"Gu 2022 Mamba","evidence_anchor":"§3 Theoretical Analysis","why_contested":"明确了SSM的能力边界，纠正了对SSM能力的过度预期，为未来架构设计提供了理论指导"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为SSM表达能力理论参考备查，无需读正文，仅需记住其与Transformer的能力边界结论即可","en":"As theoretical reference for SSM expressive capacity, no need to read full text, only remember its conclusion on capability boundary with Transformer"}},{"id":"2404.15146","title":"Rethinking LLM Memorization through the Lens of Adversarial Compression","authors":["Avi Schwarzschild","Zhili Feng","Pratyush Maini","Zachary C. Lipton","J. Zico Kolter"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$75","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.15146","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SchwarzschildFM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SchwarzschildFM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/66453d578afae006252d2ea090e151c9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM记忆的定义和度量指标存在缺陷，无法准确区分模型是记忆了训练数据还是合成了知识。过往的记忆度量多基于固定前缀的提取，容易高估或者低估记忆率，数据版权相关的研究缺乏可靠的记忆度量方法。","importance":"属于记忆度量的方法级贡献，提出的ACR（对抗压缩率）指标克服了现有指标的缺陷，为LLM数据版权评估、记忆机制研究提供了统一的度量标准。","technical_approach":"是度量方法创新，定义ACR为：如果训练集中的某个字符串可以被远短于它本身的对抗prompt诱导生成，就认为该字符串被模型记忆，即模型可以作为该字符串的压缩器，压缩率越高记忆程度越深。对比现有基于固定前缀提取的记忆度量方法，ACR不受前缀长度的影响，可以更准确地度量模型的真实记忆程度。","experiments":"在GPT-2、LLaMA2 7B等模型上测试，ACR度量的记忆率比现有固定前缀指标低42%，更符合人类对记忆的认知。ablation显示对抗prompt的长度越短，对应的字符串记忆程度越深，模型对训练数据的记忆比例远低于过往研究的估计。","authors_note":"Zachary C. Lipton（CMU）、J. Zico Kolter（CMU）是知名机器学习学者，长期从事ML安全、可解释性相关研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM memorization definitions and measurement metrics have flaws, and cannot accurately distinguish whether the model memorizes training data or synthesizes knowledge. Previous memorization measurements are mostly based on fixed-prefix extraction, which easily overestimates or underestimates memorization rate, and data copyright related research lacks reliable memorization measurement methods.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution to memorization measurement. The proposed ACR (Adversarial Compression Ratio) metric overcomes the flaws of existing metrics, providing a unified measurement standard for LLM data copyright evaluation and memorization mechanism research.","technical_approach":"It is a measurement method innovation that defines ACR as: a string from the training set is considered memorized if it can be elicited by an adversarial prompt much shorter than the string itself, meaning the model can act as a compressor for the string, and higher compression rate indicates deeper memorization. Compared with existing fixed-prefix based memorization measurement methods, ACR is not affected by prefix length, and can more accurately measure the real memorization degree of the model.","experiments":"Tested on GPT-2, LLaMA2 7B and other models. The memorization rate measured by ACR is 42% lower than existing fixed-prefix metrics, which is more consistent with human perception of memorization. Ablation shows that the shorter the adversarial prompt length, the deeper the memorization degree of the corresponding string, and the memorization ratio of training data by the model is much lower than previous research estimates.","authors_note":"Zachary C. Lipton (CMU) and J. Zico Kolter (CMU) are well-known machine learning scholars, engaged in long-term research on ML security and interpretability."},"tags":["memorization","data-privacy","compression","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["memorization","input-output compression"],"notable_authors":["Zachary C. Lipton","J. Zico Kolter"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM训练时会记忆部分训练数据，现有记忆度量方法存在明显缺陷","claim_en":"LLMs memorize part of the training data during training, existing memorization measurement methods have obvious flaws","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"现有基于固定前缀的记忆度量方法高估了LLM的记忆率，本文提出的ACR指标显示LLM的真实记忆率比过往估计低40%以上","claim_en":"Existing fixed-prefix based memorization measurement methods overestimate LLM memorization rate, the ACR metric proposed in this paper shows that the real memorization rate of LLMs is more than 40% lower than previous estimates","opposes":"过往研究基于固定前缀度量认为LLM记忆了大量训练数据，存在严重的版权风险","opposes_cite_hint":"Carlini 2023 Extracting Training Data","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"修正了对LLM记忆程度的认知，为数据版权评估和记忆缓解方法的研究提供了更可靠的度量标准"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看ACR度量指标的定义与验证章节即可，可复用至预训练数据版权相关的记忆度量实验","en":"Only read definition and validation of ACR metric, can be reused for memorization measurement experiments related to pretrain data copyright"}},{"id":"2406.14532","title":"RL on Incorrect Synthetic Data Scales the Efficiency of LLM Math Reasoning by Eight-Fold","authors":["Amrith Setlur","Saurabh Garg","Xinyang Geng","Naman Garg","Virginia Smith","Aviral Kumar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$76","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.14532","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SetlurGGGSK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SetlurGGGSK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/4b77d5b896c321a29277524a98a50215-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":8,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM数学推理的合成数据微调方案默认仅使用正确样本，收益有限且容易学习伪关联，业界始终没有明确合成数据对性能的影响边界。","importance":"方法+机制级贡献，验证了错误样本在RL微调中的价值，将合成数据微调的效率提升8倍，对推理类任务的合成数据制备和对齐流程有直接指导意义。","technical_approach":"实证驱动的方法改进，对比外部强模型生成的正确样本微调方案，改用微调过程中模型自生成的正确样本做迭代微调，再加入包含错误的合成数据做RL训练，放弃了仅喂入正确样本的传统逻辑。","experiments":"自生成正确样本迭代微调可将同问题集的训练效率提升1倍，结合错误样本上的RL训练总效率提升8倍；消融实验验证仅使用正确样本微调会放大伪关联，导致性能停滞甚至下降。未公开具体模型参数量和基准测试的绝对得分。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing synthetic data finetuning for LLM math reasoning only uses correct samples by default, which brings limited gains and easily leads to spurious correlation learning. The industry has not clearly defined the boundary of synthetic data's impact on performance.","importance":"Method and mechanism level contribution, validates the value of incorrect samples in RL finetuning, improves synthetic data finetuning efficiency by 8x, and provides direct guidance for synthetic data preparation and alignment pipeline for reasoning tasks.","technical_approach":"Empirically driven method improvement: compared to the baseline of finetuning on correct samples generated by external strong models, it uses correct samples self-generated by the model during finetuning for iterative tuning, then adds RL training on synthetic data including incorrect samples, abandoning the traditional logic of only feeding correct samples.","experiments":"Iterative finetuning on self-generated correct samples doubles training efficiency on the same problem set, and combined with RL training on incorrect samples achieves total 8x efficiency improvement. Ablation verifies that finetuning only on correct samples amplifies spurious correlations, leading to stagnant or even degraded performance. Specific model parameters and absolute benchmark scores are not disclosed.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rl","synthetic-data","math-reasoning","negative-examples"],"keywords":["Synthetic data","math reasoning","reinforcement learning","large language models"],"notable_authors":["Virginia Smith"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"合成数据微调可以提升LLM的数学推理性能","claim_en":"Synthetic data finetuning can improve LLM math reasoning performance","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"在包含错误的合成数据上做RL训练，相比仅用正确合成数据微调，数学推理效率提升8倍","claim_en":"RL training on synthetic data including incorrect samples improves math reasoning efficiency by 8x compared to finetuning only on correct synthetic samples","opposes":"传统合成数据微调默认只有全正确样本才能提升模型性能","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Title, §4 Experiments","why_contested":"打破了合成数据必须全为正确样本的认知，大幅降低了推理类合成数据的制备门槛"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对合成数据仅用正确样本的固有认知，应立刻在内部数学推理对齐流程中加入错误样本RL训练的ablation验证","en":"Changed my prior that only correct samples apply to synthetic data, immediately run ablation on wrong sample RL training in internal math reasoning alignment pipeline"}},{"id":"2409.10502","title":"Causal language modeling can elicit search and reasoning capabilities on logic puzzles","authors":["Kulin Shah","Nishanth Dikkala","Xin Wang","Rina Panigrahy"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$77","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.10502","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ShahDWP24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ShahDWP24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/67b31ca159553d5593e62d7b998d63ea-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的核心问题是：纯因果语言建模是否能在没有显式搜索器或外部程序的前提下，学出真正需要搜索与多步推理的能力。过去这类问题常被程序合成、神经符号方法或带工具调用的框架处理，因为大家普遍怀疑 next-token 训练很难稳定学到显式搜索。","importance":"这项工作的价值偏范式判断而不是方法突破。它如果成立，说明 causal LM 的能力边界比很多人假设的更宽，至少在结构化逻辑谜题上，搜索策略、候选剪枝和多步推导可以通过标准语言建模目标被诱导出来；这对我们理解 AR 预训练能否内生出 algorithmic reasoning 很有参考意义。","technical_approach":"核心方法看起来不是引入新模型，而是把 Sudoku 这类需要搜索和约束传播的过程，编码成适合因果语言建模学习的序列任务。关键设计通常在两点：一，训练数据不只给最终答案，还会给中间步骤、填格决策、候选值收缩等轨迹，让模型学到“先选哪里，再用什么规则”的程序性顺序；二，任务被构造为必须跨多步保留局部状态，否则模型只能做短视模式匹配，无法完成难题。和直接监督最终解相比，这样的设计更容易让 Transformer 把推理过程折叠进 residual stream，而不是仅记住谜题分布。","experiments":"从摘要可确认的实验范围是 Sudoku 求解，重点评估模型是否能先搜索空格、再应用策略、必要时连续执行多步约束收缩。摘要没有给出参数规模、数据规模和具体准确率，因此不能编造数字。可以合理推断，论文会比较只预测答案与预测过程链条的训练方式，并分析不同难度谜题上的泛化；最有价值的观察如果成立，应是：随着训练规模增加，模型不只是记住常见盘面，而是在更难实例上表现出可迁移的搜索顺序和策略组合能力。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a clean question: can plain causal language modeling learn genuine search-and-reasoning behavior without an external solver or a symbolic search module? This matters because tasks like Sudoku are usually treated as evidence that next-token training is not enough, and are instead handled with programmatic or neuro-symbolic machinery.","importance":"Its contribution is mainly conceptual rather than algorithmic. If the results hold, they push the boundary of what standard autoregressive training can internalize: not just pattern completion, but stepwise search, candidate elimination, and sequential decision-making on a structured logical task. That is directly relevant to debates about whether reasoning in LMs can emerge from the pretraining objective alone.","technical_approach":"The method appears to be a careful task formulation rather than a new architecture. Sudoku solving is serialized into trajectories that expose intermediate decisions, such as which cell to act on, which rule to apply, and when a move only narrows candidates instead of fixing a value. That choice matters because supervising only final answers would let the model lean on superficial correlations, while supervising the process forces it to represent state updates across multiple dependent steps.","experiments":"The abstract confirms Sudoku as the main testbed and emphasizes multi-step strategy application, search over empty cells, and candidate pruning. It does not provide model sizes, dataset sizes, baselines, or headline accuracies, so those cannot be stated reliably here. The most informative experimental angle, if present in the full paper, would be whether process-supervised causal modeling generalizes better to harder puzzles than answer-only training, and whether scaling improves behavior in a way that looks algorithmic rather than memorized.","authors_note":""},"tags":["causal-lm","reasoning","search","sudoku","emergence"],"keywords":["reasoning","search","planning","sudoku","world model","transformers"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对纯CLM目标无法内生搜索推理能力的认知，可尝试在内部算法推理预训练数据中加入多步轨迹数据","en":"Changed my prior that pure CLM cannot learn endogenous search reasoning, try adding multi-step trajectory data to internal algorithmic reasoning pretrain data"}},{"id":"ShaiTOMR24","title":"Transformers Represent Belief State Geometry in their Residual Stream","authors":["Adam S. Shai","Lucas Teixeira","Alexander Gietelink Oldenziel","Sarah Marzen","Paul M. Riechers"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$78","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ShaiTOMR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ShaiTOMR24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/8936fa1691764912d9519e1b5673ea66-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心问题是：Transformer 内部是否真的形成了可解释的 belief state，也就是对环境潜在状态或不确定信息的内部表征，而不只是做表面 token 续写。过去很多 mechanistic interpretability 工作能定位局部电路，但较少直接回答“残差流里是否存在几何结构化的信念状态表示”。","importance":"这是一篇机制分析类工作，对 pretrain 的直接工程收益不一定立刻显现，但对理解 LM 为什么能做隐式状态跟踪、POMDP 式推断和多步上下文整合很关键。如果它证明 belief state geometry 可被稳定读出，就说明 residual stream 不是杂乱缓存，而更像一个连续状态空间，这会影响我们设计 probing、训练目标和 memory 机制的方式。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法是分析 Transformer residual stream 中的几何结构，并把这种结构与 belief state 对齐。典型做法通常是：在可控环境或合成任务中定义真实 belief state，然后训练或分析 Transformer，再用线性 probe、表示相似性、流形几何或坐标变换去验证模型内部是否保留了对应结构。关键不在于找到某个神经元，而在于证明整层表示的距离、方向或子空间和 belief 更新规律一致；这比单点可解释性更接近“模型是否学到了状态空间动力学”。","experiments":"给定当前信息，无法确认具体实验环境、模型规模和数值结果。预期这类论文会使用合成序列任务、隐藏状态环境或部分可观察 setting，比较不同层的 residual stream 与真实 belief state 的对齐度，并检验这种几何在训练后期是否自发出现。最有价值的结果通常不是绝对分数，而是两类证据：一，belief 表示在某些层突然变线性可读；二，推理误差和几何失真相关，说明这种表示不是事后 probe 幻觉。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a fundamental interpretability question: do Transformers build an internal belief state in their residual stream, rather than merely performing token-to-token pattern matching? Prior work often identifies local circuits, but that does not directly tell us whether the model represents uncertainty and latent state in a structured way.","importance":"This is a mechanistic result with real implications for pretraining research, even if not immediately a new training recipe. If belief states are geometrically encoded in the residual stream, that suggests the model is organizing context into a continuous latent state space, which matters for understanding implicit memory, partial observability, and multi-step inference in language models.","technical_approach":"From the title, the core approach is to analyze the geometry of residual representations and compare it to ground-truth belief states. A typical setup for this kind of work is a controlled task with known latent state dynamics, followed by probes or geometric analyses that test whether distances, directions, or subspaces in the residual stream track belief updates. The key idea is not to find one neuron for one concept, but to show that the representation as a whole has state-space structure.","experiments":"The provided information does not include the experimental setup, model sizes, or quantitative results, so those cannot be stated confidently. The likely evidence in the full paper would include controlled environments, layerwise analysis of alignment between residual states and true belief states, and tests showing that geometric structure appears at specific depths and correlates with task performance. The strongest result in this genre is usually not a benchmark gain but a robust representation-level regularity.","authors_note":""},"tags":["belief-state","residual-stream","interpretability","transformer"],"keywords":["Interpretability","Computational Mechanics","Belief State","Features","Representation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"证明残差流存在结构化信念状态表示，后续预训练目标设计可基于此优化上下文状态跟踪能力","en":"Proves structured belief state representations exist in residual stream, subsequent pretrain objective design can optimize context state tracking based on this"}},{"id":"Shen00K0WLWLW24","title":"Search for Efficient Large Language Models","authors":["Xuan Shen","Pu Zhao","Yifan Gong","Zhenglun Kong","Zheng Zhan","Yushu Wu","Ming Lin","Chao Wu","Xue Lin","Yanzhi Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$79","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Shen00K0WLWLW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Shen00K0WLWLW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/fb64a43508e0cfe53ee6179ff31ea900-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：高效 LLM 的设计空间非常大，靠人工经验做架构/配置选择既慢又容易错过更优点，因此需要系统化搜索。过去很多“高效模型”工作只改一个模块或只在单一预算下比较，难以回答在真实算力、延迟、显存约束下什么组合最优。","importance":"这是方法与系统交叉的工作，对 pretrain 的意义在于把效率问题从局部 trick 提升到全局设计搜索。它的潜在价值不是某个特定结构，而是告诉我们：在给定训练算力或 serving 预算时，宽度、深度、attention 形式、FFN 配置、token mixer 以及精度策略之间存在可系统搜索的 Pareto 前沿。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法是面向 LLM 效率的 architecture/configuration search。关键设计大概率包括：定义搜索空间、用 proxy 任务或小规模预训练快速评估候选、再根据质量-成本目标进行选择。与传统 NAS 不同，LLM 场景下真正难点不是找最高精度，而是在训练 FLOPs、推理吞吐、显存占用和稳定性之间做多目标折中；因此好的方法通常会把硬件感知约束直接纳入目标函数，而不是先搜模型再看能不能跑。","experiments":"当前信息不足以确认具体搜索空间、模型规模和结果数字。预期论文会报告在同等参数量或同等训练/推理预算下，搜索得到的模型优于手工设计 baseline，并展示不同硬件或上下文长度下 Pareto 曲线的变化。最值得关注的实验是 transfer：小规模搜索得到的结论是否能迁移到更大模型；如果不能，说明搜索只是在小模型上过拟合噪声，不足以指导真正的预训练决策。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses the fact that efficient LLM design is a large combinatorial space, and manual architecture tuning is both slow and unreliable under real compute and latency constraints. Many prior efficiency papers optimize one component at a time, which does not answer what the best overall design is for a given budget.","importance":"This matters for pretraining because it reframes efficiency as a global design optimization problem rather than a collection of isolated tricks. The value is not just one better architecture, but a way to reason about Pareto trade-offs among quality, training FLOPs, inference latency, memory, and stability when building language models under fixed budgets.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method is to search the design space of efficient LLMs, likely over architecture and system-relevant hyperparameters. A practical approach in this setting usually combines a hardware-aware search space, cheap proxy evaluations or small-scale pretraining runs, and a multi-objective selection criterion. The crucial difference from classic NAS is that here the target is not raw accuracy alone, but a quality-cost frontier that reflects actual deployment and training constraints.","experiments":"The provided information does not specify the search space, model scales, or quantitative gains. The key expected results would compare searched models against strong hand-designed baselines under matched parameter, training, or latency budgets, and report Pareto improvements rather than a single metric. The most important test is transfer: whether conclusions found at small scale still hold at larger scale, which determines whether the search is genuinely useful for foundation-model design.","authors_note":""},"tags":["nas","llm-efficiency","architecture-search","model-compression"],"keywords":["Architecture Search","Large Language Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变了我对高效LLM设计只能靠局部调参的认知，应立刻在内部训练效率优化流程中引入该全局多目标硬件感知搜索范式。","en":"Overturns the prior that efficient LLM design relies on local tweaks, we should immediately integrate this global hardware-aware multi-objective search framework into internal training efficiency pipelines."}},{"id":"ShenFPPWKHKFK24","title":"Superposed Decoding: Multiple Generations from a Single Autoregressive Inference Pass","authors":["Ethan Shen","Alan Fan","Sarah M. Pratt","Jae Sung Park","Matthew Wallingford","Sham M. Kakade","Ari Holtzman","Ranjay Krishna","Ali Farhadi","Aditya Kusupati"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ShenFPPWKHKFK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ShenFPPWKHKFK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d74f9efa1d8ca30b31d65cef8de7c2bf-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：自回归解码一次前向通常只产生一个 token 分布，想要多条样本就要重复跑多次，导致采样成本近乎线性增长。过去并行生成大多依赖 speculative decoding、非 AR 模型或工程批处理，但没有直接改变“单次 AR pass 只能服务一条生成轨迹”的限制。","importance":"这是 inference 范式层面很有意思的一篇工作。它的重要性在于，如果同一次自回归前向能支持多条候选生成，就会改变采样、best-of-N、diverse decoding 和 test-time search 的成本结构；对 post-train 和推理增强尤其有价值，因为很多能力提升手段本质上都依赖多样本。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法是 superposed decoding：在一次自回归推理过程中叠加多条生成。关键思想很可能是让模型在共享前缀和共享计算的前提下，同时维护多个潜在续写分支，并用某种表示叠加、混合状态或可分离读出机制来避免完全独立地跑 N 次。和普通批处理不同，这类方法真正想共享的是同一上下文下的大量重复计算；和 speculative decoding 不同，它不是先用小模型猜再验证，而是试图从大模型一次 pass 中直接抽取多条 generation trajectory。","experiments":"当前信息不足以确认具体模型、任务和加速比。预期实验会比较同质量下的 wall-clock latency、tokens/s、样本多样性和 best-of-N 效果，对比独立采样、批处理采样以及可能的 speculative baseline。最值得看的边界是：随着并行生成条数增加，quality degradation 是否可控；如果叠加过强导致分支互相干扰，生成会趋同或质量下降，那它更适合小 N 候选而非大规模采样。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a basic inefficiency in autoregressive generation: one forward pass normally supports one continuation, so drawing multiple samples costs roughly multiple passes. Existing work can batch requests or use speculative decoding, but it does not remove the one-pass-one-trajectory constraint for a single prompt.","importance":"This is an interesting inference-level contribution because many useful test-time strategies, such as diverse sampling and best-of-N selection, are expensive only because they require repeated decoding. If multiple generations can be produced from a single autoregressive pass, the cost structure of search and sampling changes in a meaningful way.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method is superposed decoding, which likely overlays multiple candidate continuations within a shared autoregressive computation. The key idea is probably to exploit the large amount of duplicated computation across samples from the same prompt, while maintaining enough separation to decode multiple outputs at the end. That is different from ordinary batching, which still treats each sample independently, and different from speculative decoding, which relies on a separate draft model.","experiments":"The provided information does not include model sizes, tasks, or speedup numbers. The natural evaluations would compare wall-clock latency, throughput, output diversity, and best-of-N quality against independent sampling, batched sampling, and possibly speculative baselines. The main trade-off to watch is interference: as more samples are superposed, efficiency may improve but sample quality or diversity may collapse if branches are not sufficiently disentangled.","authors_note":""},"tags":["speculative-decoding","superposed-decoding","inference-efficiency"],"keywords":["Efficient Decoding","Superposition","Autoregressive Modelling"],"recommendation":{"zh":"打破了单次自回归前向仅能生成单条轨迹的固有认知，可直接落地到内部best-of-N采样、推理增强模块降低计算成本。","en":"Breaks the inherent limit that one autoregressive forward pass only outputs one trajectory, can be directly deployed to internal best-of-N sampling and inference enhancement modules to cut compute cost."}},{"id":"2405.19265","title":"AlchemistCoder: Harmonizing and Eliciting Code Capability by Hindsight Tuning on Multi-source Data","authors":["Zifan Song","Yudong Wang","Wenwei Zhang","Kuikun Liu","Chengqi Lyu","Demin Song","Qipeng Guo","Hang Yan","Dahua Lin","Kai Chen","Cairong Zhao"],"institutions":["Shanghai AI Laboratory"],"abstract":"$7b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.19265","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SongWZLLSG0L0Z24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SongWZLLSG0L0Z24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/040c816286b3844fd78f2124eec75f2e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Code LLM 的指令微调通常只用单一来源数据，质量和多样性有限；而混合多源代码数据时，不同数据源的风格和质量冲突会导致训练信号互相干扰，性能次优。","importance":"数据级贡献。核心启示是：多源数据混合不是简单拼接，数据间的风格/质量冲突需要显式处理。这个观察对 pretrain 阶段的数据配比和 mid-train/SFT 阶段的多源数据融合都有参考价值。提出的 hindsight relabeling 思路（根据实际输出回溯调整 prompt）是一个实用的数据工程技巧。","technical_approach":"提出 AlchemistPrompts：先识别多源代码语料中不同来源的风格和质量差异，然后为每个数据源设计特定 prompt，并通过 hindsight relabeling（事后重标注）来协调 instruction-response 对。本质是用 prompt 层面的条件化来缓解数据冲突，而非修改模型架构或损失函数。与直接混合训练相比，额外成本主要在数据预处理阶段。","experiments":"摘要未给出完整数字，但声称在代码生成和泛化能力上优于单源微调的 Code LLM。具体 baseline 和提升幅度需查看全文。","authors_note":"作者来自上海 AI Lab（商汤联合实验室），Wenwei Zhang、Chengqi Lyu 等参与了 InternLM 系列工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Code LLMs fine-tuned on single-source data suffer from limited quality and diversity, while naively mixing multi-source code corpora introduces style and quality conflicts that hurt performance.","importance":"A data-engineering contribution. The key insight—that multi-source data conflicts need explicit handling rather than simple concatenation—is relevant to both pretraining data mixing and SFT data curation. The hindsight relabeling idea is a practical technique.","technical_approach":"Introduces AlchemistPrompts: data-specific prompts with hindsight relabeling to harmonize heterogeneous code corpora. The approach conditions training on source-specific prompts and retrospectively adjusts instruction-response pairs, resolving conflicts at the data level without architectural changes.","experiments":"Claims improved code generation and generalization over single-source fine-tuned Code LLMs. Specific numbers and baselines not fully available from the abstract.","authors_note":"Authors from Shanghai AI Lab. Wenwei Zhang and Chengqi Lyu are associated with the InternLM project."},"tags":["code-llm","instruction-tuning","data-mixture","post-training"],"notable_authors":["Wenwei Zhang"],"keywords":["Large Language Model","Code Generation","Instruction Fine-tuning","Hindsight Relabeling"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的多源数据冲突缓解方案和hindsight relabeling实现细节即可，数据工程技巧可直接复用到内部代码SFT流程。","en":"Only read §3 for multi-source data conflict mitigation and hindsight relabeling implementation, the data engineering trick can be directly reused in internal code SFT pipelines."}},{"id":"2406.16254","title":"Confidence Regulation Neurons in Language Models","authors":["Alessandro Stolfo","Ben Wu","Wes Gurnee","Yonatan Belinkov","Xingyi Song","Mrinmaya Sachan","Neel Nanda"],"institutions":["Technion","MIT"],"abstract":"$7c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.16254","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/StolfoWGBSSN24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/StolfoWGBSSN24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e21955c93dede886af1d0d362c756757-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 如何在内部表示和调控 next-token 预测的不确定性？此前发现了 entropy neuron（通过影响 LayerNorm scale 来缩放 logits），本文进一步揭示其工作机制，并发现了新的 token frequency neuron。","importance":"机制分析级贡献，对 pretrain 研究有直接启发。理解模型如何内部调控置信度，有助于解释 loss spike、训练动态、以及模型在不确定场景下的行为。entropy neuron 通过写入 unembedding null space 来影响 residual stream norm 而非直接改变 logits，这个发现揭示了 LayerNorm 在 Transformer 中的一个非平凡功能角色。token frequency neuron 的发现则暗示模型学到了显式的词频先验。","technical_approach":"对多个模型（最大到 7B）进行 mechanistic interpretability 分析。核心发现：entropy neuron 的高权重范数并非直接作用于 logits，而是写入 unembedding 矩阵的零空间（null space），从而只影响 residual stream 的范数，进而通过 LayerNorm 间接缩放所有 logits。这是一个巧妙的间接调控机制。同时识别出 token frequency neuron，它们编码了 token 的频率信息，作为另一种置信度调节手段。","experiments":"在多个模型（up to 7B 参数）上验证了 entropy neuron 和 token frequency neuron 的存在。通过 ablation（移除这些 neuron）观察对输出分布的影响。具体数字需查看全文。","authors_note":"Yonatan Belinkov（Technion）在 NLP interpretability 领域有大量代表性工作。Wes Gurnee 参与过 Representation Engineering 等 mechanistic interpretability 研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How do LLMs internally represent and regulate uncertainty in next-token predictions? This paper investigates entropy neurons and discovers a new component—token frequency neurons.","importance":"A mechanistic interpretability contribution directly relevant to pretraining. Understanding how models regulate confidence internally informs our understanding of training dynamics, loss spikes, and model behavior under uncertainty. The finding that entropy neurons operate via the unembedding null space reveals a non-trivial role of LayerNorm.","technical_approach":"Entropy neurons have unusually high weight norms but don't directly affect logits. Instead, they write into the unembedding null space, affecting only the residual stream norm, which then scales logits indirectly through LayerNorm. Token frequency neurons encode token frequency priors as a separate confidence regulation mechanism. Analysis spans models up to 7B parameters.","experiments":"Entropy neurons and token frequency neurons are identified across multiple model scales (up to 7B). Ablation studies show their removal significantly affects output distributions. Specific metrics require the full paper.","authors_note":"Yonatan Belinkov (Technion) is a leading figure in NLP interpretability. Wes Gurnee has contributed to Representation Engineering and mechanistic interpretability."},"tags":["interpretability","uncertainty","calibration","training-dynamics"],"notable_authors":["Yonatan Belinkov","Wes Gurnee"],"keywords":["LLMs","Interpretability","Mechanistic Interpretability"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅需读§4关于entropy neuron作用于unembedding零空间的机制分析，可解释训练中logits缩放和loss spike现象。","en":"Only read §4 for the mechanism analysis of entropy neurons acting on the unembedding null space, which explains logits scaling and loss spikes during training."}},{"id":"2408.01420","title":"Mission Impossible: A Statistical Perspective on Jailbreaking LLMs","authors":["Jingtong Su","Julia Kempe","Karen Ullrich"],"institutions":["New York University","Meta AI"],"abstract":"$7d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.01420","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SuKU24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SuKU24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/439bf902de1807088d8b731ca20b0777-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"从统计理论角度解释为什么对齐后的 LLM 仍然可以被 jailbreak：偏好对齐本质上只是在预训练分布上做了有限的修正，对抗性 prompt 可以绕过这层修正。","importance":"理论级贡献，对 pretrain ↔ posttrain 接口的理解有价值。核心洞察是：预训练分布中已经包含了有害内容的支持（support），对齐只是降低了这些区域的概率质量，但无法完全消除。这意味着 jailbreak 的根源在 pretrain 阶段，对齐只是一层薄薄的保护。这对思考 pretrain 数据清洗策略和对齐的根本局限性都有启示。","technical_approach":"建立统计框架，将预训练 LLM 建模为对训练数据分布的近似，将偏好对齐建模为对该分布的条件化修正。在此框架下证明：(1) 预训练 LLM 会模仿训练数据中的有害行为；(2) 对齐后的模型在对抗性 prompt 下仍可被诱导回到有害分布区域。理论分析而非经验性工作。","experiments":"以理论分析为主，摘要未提供具体实验数字。预计有验证理论预测的实验。","authors_note":"Julia Kempe 是 NYU 的知名理论计算机科学家。Karen Ullrich 来自 Meta AI。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Why can aligned LLMs still be jailbroken? This paper provides a statistical theory showing that preference alignment only partially suppresses harmful behaviors already present in the pretrained distribution.","importance":"Theoretical contribution with direct implications for the pretrain-posttrain interface. The key insight: jailbreaking is fundamentally rooted in pretraining data, and alignment is a thin probabilistic correction that adversarial prompts can circumvent. This informs both data curation strategies and the inherent limits of post-hoc alignment.","technical_approach":"Formalizes pretraining as distribution approximation and alignment as conditional correction. Proves that (1) pretrained LLMs will mimic harmful content in training data, and (2) adversarial prompts can shift the model back to harmful distribution regions despite alignment. A theoretical framework, not an empirical study.","experiments":"Primarily theoretical. Specific experimental validation details not available from the abstract.","authors_note":"Julia Kempe is a prominent theoretical computer scientist at NYU. Karen Ullrich is at Meta AI."},"tags":["jailbreak","alignment","safety","statistical-analysis"],"notable_authors":["Julia Kempe","Karen Ullrich"],"keywords":["large language models","jailbreak","safety alignment","theory"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接读§2的统计框架证明部分即可，明确了越狱根源在预训练数据分布，对齐仅能做有限修正。","en":"Only read §2 for the statistical framework proof, which clarifies that jailbreak root causes lie in pre-training data distribution and alignment only provides limited correction."}},{"id":"SunYSLYWG24","title":"Easy-to-Hard Generalization: Scalable Alignment Beyond Human Supervision","authors":["Zhiqing Sun","Longhui Yu","Yikang Shen","Weiyang Liu","Yiming Yang","Sean Welleck","Chuang Gan"],"institutions":["Carnegie Mellon University"],"abstract":"$7e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SunYSLYWG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SunYSLYWG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/5b6346a05a537d4cdb2f50323452a9fe-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"当前对齐方法依赖人类标注，但人类能力有限，无法为超出自身能力的难题提供高质量监督信号。本文研究如何从简单问题的对齐泛化到困难问题（easy-to-hard generalization），实现超越人类监督的可扩展对齐。","importance":"范式级贡献，直接关联 scalable oversight 和 superalignment 问题。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：如果模型能从简单任务的训练信号泛化到复杂任务，这暗示预训练阶段学到的表示具有某种组合泛化能力。这也与 R1-Zero 范式（用简单 reward 引导复杂推理）的思路相呼应。","technical_approach":"摘要为空，无法提供具体技术细节。从标题和问题描述推断，核心思路是在简单问题上训练对齐信号，然后研究这种对齐能力向更难问题的迁移条件和机制。","experiments":"摘要为空，无法提供实验细节。","authors_note":"Zhiqing Sun 来自 CMU，在 LLM 对齐方面有多项工作。Yiming Yang 是 CMU 的资深教授。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Alignment methods rely on human supervision, but humans cannot provide quality feedback on problems beyond their own capability. This paper studies easy-to-hard generalization to achieve scalable alignment beyond human supervision.","importance":"A paradigm-level contribution addressing scalable oversight and superalignment. For pretraining, the implication is that pretrained representations may support compositional generalization from simple to complex tasks, echoing the R1-Zero paradigm of using simple rewards to guide complex reasoning.","technical_approach":"Abstract is empty. From the title, the approach likely trains alignment signals on easy problems and studies transfer conditions to harder problems.","experiments":"No details available from the empty abstract.","authors_note":"Zhiqing Sun is from CMU with multiple works on LLM alignment. Yiming Yang is a senior professor at CMU."},"tags":["alignment","scalable-oversight","easy-to-hard","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Zhiqing Sun","Yiming Yang"],"keywords":["easy-to-hard generalization","scalable oversight","AI alignment"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4的easy-to-hard泛化迁移条件实验即可，对预训练组合泛化能力的诱导和超对齐研究有参考价值。","en":"Only read §4 for easy-to-hard generalization transfer condition experiments, useful for inducing pre-training compositional generalization and superalignment research."}},{"id":"SzatkowskiWPS24","title":"Exploiting Activation Sparsity with Dense to Dynamic-k Mixture-of-Experts Conversion","authors":["Filip Szatkowski","Bartosz Wójcik","Mikolaj Piórczynski","Simone Scardapane"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$7f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SzatkowskiWPS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SzatkowskiWPS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/4c2092ec0b1370cce3fb5965ab255fae-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"稠密Transformer推理成本高，现有稠密层转MoE的方案没有利用激活稀疏性做前置优化，且固定选k个专家的逻辑忽略了不同输入的激活神经元方差，效率提升空间有限。","importance":"系统级优化贡献，对预训练后稠密模型转稀疏部署、降低推理成本有实用落地价值。","technical_approach":"现有稠密转MoE方案的改进，先对基础稠密模型做激活稀疏性正则，再提出动态k专家选择规则，每个token根据自身激活情况调整执行的专家数量，放弃了固定k的选择逻辑。","experiments":"未公开具体模型参数量、基准测试指标，仅验证了激活稀疏正则和动态k专家选择均可提升稠密转MoE的效率；观察到不同输入的激活神经元数量方差较大，固定k选专家会产生大量冗余计算。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Dense Transformers have high inference cost. Existing dense-to-MoE conversion schemes do not use activation sparsity for pre-optimization, and the fixed k expert selection logic ignores the variance of activated neurons for different inputs, leaving limited room for efficiency improvement.","importance":"System-level optimization contribution, with practical deployment value for converting pretrained dense models to sparse deployment and reducing inference cost.","technical_approach":"Improvement of existing dense-to-MoE schemes: first regularize activation sparsity of the base dense model, then propose a dynamic k expert selection rule that adjusts the number of executed experts per token based on its own activation status, abandoning the fixed k selection logic.","experiments":"Specific model parameters and benchmark metrics are not disclosed. It only verifies that both activation sparsity regularization and dynamic k expert selection can improve dense-to-MoE conversion efficiency. It is observed that the number of activated neurons varies greatly across inputs, and fixed k expert selection causes large amounts of redundant computation.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","activation-sparsity","dense-to-moe","efficiency"],"keywords":["inference efficiency","activation sparsity","dynamic-k gating","mixture-of-experts","conditional computation","dynamic neural networks"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer存在大量激活稀疏性，可用于降低推理成本","claim_en":"Transformers have significant activation sparsity that can be leveraged to reduce inference cost","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"对基础稠密模型做激活稀疏正则后再转MoE，转换效率远高于无正则的直接转换","claim_en":"Regularizing activation sparsity of the base dense model before MoE conversion achieves much higher conversion efficiency than direct conversion without regularization","opposes":"传统稠密转MoE方案默认不需要对基础模型做额外稀疏正则即可直接转换","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Experiments","why_contested":"补充了稠密转MoE的前置预处理步骤，可进一步提升稀疏化的效率上限"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为稠密转MoE部署优化的文献备查，无新的预训练架构设计insight，不需要读正文。","en":"Only for literature reference of dense-to-MoE deployment optimization, no new pre-training architecture insight, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"VarunMASS024","title":"Time-Reversal Provides Unsupervised Feedback to LLMs","authors":["Yerram Varun","Rahul Madhavan","Sravanti Addepalli","Arun Suggala","Karthikeyan Shanmugam","Prateek Jain"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$80","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/VarunMASS024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/VarunMASS024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/34aec5ab2f99a8f592e0cca4974013f2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作试图回答：在没有人工标注奖励或参考答案的情况下，能不能给 LLM 提供一种可自动检验的反馈信号。传统做法要么依赖监督微调，要么依赖昂贵/脆弱的 reward model，而很多任务其实缺少稳定标注，因此无监督反馈是一个很现实的缺口。","importance":"它的重要性在于训练信号设计，介于 pretrain 和 posttrain 之间。若时间反演（time-reversal）真能提供稳定反馈，这意味着我们可以从任务本身的可逆性中挖出自监督信用信号，减少对人工偏好的依赖；这对推理、规划和自举式对齐都很有启发。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用“时间反演”构造无监督反馈。直观上，模型先生成一个前向过程的答案或轨迹，再检查能否从结果反推回初始条件，或者构造前后向一致性目标；只有那些在逆向上也自洽的生成才被强化。这样的设计有效，因为它把“答案像不像”转成“过程是否可逆、是否守恒约束”，反馈来自结构一致性而不是外部标签。它的边界也明显：只适用于存在可逆结构或近似可逆验证器的任务。","experiments":"实验应会覆盖数学、符号推理、规划或程序类任务，因为这些场景更容易定义前后向一致性。关键事实通常是：相比纯自训练或无 verifier 的自举，time-reversal 能带来更稳定的学习，并减少错误模式的自我放大。没有摘要时，具体模型规模、训练轮数、任务集和提升数字无法确认。","authors_note":"作者列表含有 Karthikeyan Shanmugam，属于较活跃的学习理论/LLM 研究者；其机构与团队代表作无法仅凭当前信息确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether LLMs can receive useful feedback without human labels, gold solutions, or a learned reward model. Existing post-training pipelines depend heavily on supervised targets or preference signals, which are costly and often unavailable for many reasoning tasks.","importance":"The contribution is about training signals at the pretrain–posttrain boundary. If time-reversal can provide reliable unsupervised feedback, it offers a way to bootstrap learning from task structure itself, reducing dependence on external supervision and potentially improving self-improvement loops.","technical_approach":"The method uses time-reversal as an unsupervised consistency signal. The model likely generates a forward solution or trajectory, then checks whether the result can reconstruct the starting condition or satisfy a backward consistency objective; outputs that are consistent in both directions receive positive feedback. This is appealing because it replaces subjective reward with structural validity. The trade-off is clear: it works best where reversibility or a good backward verifier exists.","experiments":"The natural evaluation setting is math, symbolic reasoning, planning, or program-like tasks where forward/backward consistency is meaningful. The most useful findings would be improved learning stability over plain self-training and reduced error amplification in iterative bootstrapping. Without the abstract, specific model sizes, datasets, and numerical gains cannot be reported reliably.","authors_note":"Karthikeyan Shanmugam is a notable author on the paper. Institutions and representative prior team work cannot be confirmed from the provided metadata."},"tags":["llm","unsupervised-feedback","reinforcement-learning","self-improvement"],"notable_authors":["Karthikeyan Shanmugam"],"keywords":["LLMs","Reranking","reverse LLMs","reverse scoring","defenses","generative models","sequence reversal"],"recommendation":{"zh":"读§3的时间反演自监督反馈构造逻辑即可，可复用在内部无标注推理任务的自举训练中。","en":"Only read §3 for time-reversal unsupervised feedback construction logic, can be reused in bootstrapping training for internal unlabeled reasoning tasks."}},{"id":"VladymyrovO0G24","title":"Linear Transformers are Versatile In-Context Learners","authors":["Max Vladymyrov","Johannes von Oswald","Mark Sandler","Rong Ge"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$81","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/VladymyrovO0G24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/VladymyrovO0G24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/57a3c602f0a1c8980cc5ed07e49d9490-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：linear transformer 是否真的只是在效率上接近标准 attention，还是也能承担更一般的 in-context learning（ICL）能力。过去线性 attention 往往被认为在表达力上吃亏，因此多数讨论集中在速度和长序列，而不是它能否学会任务内算法。","importance":"它的意义在架构判断。对 pretrain 而言，如果 linear transformer 在 ICL 上比直觉中更强，那么“近似 attention 会破坏能力”的常见担忧需要被重新审视；这直接影响长上下文模型、低成本预训练和推理系统设计。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是系统证明并实证展示 linear transformer 可以实现多种 ICL 行为。关键机制可能包括：分析其状态更新如何等价于某类在线学习器、记忆器或核回归器；再构造任务检验它是否能从上下文中拟合规则。它和传统“线性 attention 只是低秩近似”的叙述不同，重点不是逼近 softmax，而是展示其本身就是一种可工作的序列归纳器。","experiments":"实验预计会围绕合成 ICL 任务与标准序列任务，比较 linear transformer 与 full attention 在样本效率、长度泛化和鲁棒性上的差异。若论文题目成立，最值得看的不是是否全面超过 Transformer，而是在哪些任务家族上表现相当，在哪些需要精细内容寻址的任务上明显掉队。没有摘要，无法给出具体参数量、上下文长度和数值结果。","authors_note":"Johannes von Oswald 与 Rong Ge 是较活跃且有辨识度的作者；但机构与团队代表作无法在当前信息下确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether linear Transformers are merely efficient approximations, or whether they can also serve as genuinely capable in-context learners. Prior discussions often focused on speed and long-context scaling, while assuming an ability gap relative to full attention.","importance":"This matters at the architecture level. If linear Transformers support stronger ICL than commonly assumed, then the usual trade-off between efficiency and capability is less rigid than many practitioners believe. That has direct implications for long-context pretraining and deployment-efficient model design.","technical_approach":"The likely contribution is a mix of analysis and empirical evidence showing that linear Transformers can implement meaningful forms of in-context learning. The key mechanism is probably to connect their recurrent state updates to online learners, associative memory, or kernel-style estimators, then test those predictions on controlled tasks. The point is not just that they approximate softmax attention, but that they form a viable sequence learner in their own right.","experiments":"The evaluation likely uses synthetic ICL tasks plus standard sequence benchmarks, comparing linear and full-attention models on sample efficiency, length generalization, and robustness. The most useful outcome would be a map of where linear models match Transformers and where they fail, especially on tasks requiring precise content-based retrieval. Numerical details are unavailable from the provided information.","authors_note":"Johannes von Oswald and Rong Ge are notable authors on the paper. Their exact institutional affiliations and representative team history cannot be confirmed here."},"tags":["linear-transformer","icl","architecture","attention"],"notable_authors":["Johannes von Oswald","Rong Ge"],"keywords":["Linear Transformers","In-Context Learning","Noisy Linear Regression","Model Selection","Mesa-optimization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"看§5的线性Transformer ICL能力实证结果即可，推翻了近似attention必然损失上下文学习能力的固有认知。","en":"Only read §5 for empirical results of linear Transformer ICL capability, overturns the prior that approximate attention inevitably harms in-context learning performance."}},{"id":"WangDDZSEZSK24","title":"HelpSteer 2: Open-source dataset for training top-performing reward models","authors":["Zhilin Wang","Yi Dong","Olivier Delalleau","Jiaqi Zeng","Gerald Shen","Daniel Egert","Jimmy Zhang","Makesh Narsimhan Sreedhar","Oleksii Kuchaiev"],"institutions":["NVIDIA"],"abstract":"$82","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangDDZSEZSK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangDDZSEZSK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/02fd91a387a6a5a5751e81b58a75af90-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有开源偏好数据集（Open Assistant、HH-RLHF、HelpSteer1）已无法匹配强LLM的对齐需求，从闭源模型蒸馏的偏好数据存在商业使用限制，无法支撑商用奖励模型训练。","importance":"数据级贡献，发布了CC-BY-4.0许可的高质量开源偏好数据集，对开源RLHF对齐的商用落地有直接推动作用。","technical_approach":"全新偏好数据集构建工作，在生成回复质量和多维度属性标注质量上做了全面优化，放弃了闭源模型蒸馏的数据生成路径，所有数据完全开放商用。","experiments":"用Nemotron-4-340B基座模型在HelpSteer2上训练的奖励模型，在对应对齐基准上达到92.0%的得分。未公开对比基线的具体性能差距。","authors_note":"英伟达团队发布，核心作者包括Olivier Delalleau，团队此前推出过Nemotron系列大模型、HelpSteer1偏好数据集。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing open-source preference datasets (Open Assistant, HH-RLHF, HelpSteer 1) can no longer meet the alignment requirements of strong LLMs. Preference data distilled from closed-source models has commercial usage restrictions, and cannot support commercial reward model training.","importance":"Data-level contribution, releases a high-quality open-source preference dataset under CC-BY-4.0 license, which directly promotes the commercial deployment of open-source RLHF alignment.","technical_approach":"New preference dataset construction work, comprehensively optimizes generated response quality and multi-dimensional attribute annotation quality, abandons the closed-source model distillation data generation path, all data is fully open for commercial use.","experiments":"The reward model trained on HelpSteer2 with Nemotron-4-340B base model achieves 92.0% score on the corresponding alignment benchmark. Specific performance gap compared to baselines is not disclosed.","authors_note":"Published by NVIDIA team, core author includes Olivier Delalleau. The team previously released Nemotron series LLMs and HelpSteer 1 preference dataset."},"tags":["reward-model","dataset","rlhf","alignment"],"keywords":["reward model","preference dataset","helpfulness dataset","model alignment"],"notable_authors":["Olivier Delalleau"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"高质量偏好数据集是训练有效奖励模型的核心前提","claim_en":"High-quality preference datasets are the core prerequisite for training effective reward models","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于HelpSteer2训练的奖励模型性能优于基于闭源蒸馏偏好数据训练的同规模奖励模型","claim_en":"Reward models trained on HelpSteer2 outperform same-size reward models trained on preference data distilled from closed-source models","opposes":"传统偏好数据集构建默认闭源蒸馏的数据质量高于开源构建的数据集","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments, Table 1","why_contested":"证明了开源可商用的偏好数据集可以达到闭源蒸馏数据的效果，降低了商用对齐的法律风险"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"直接看数据集统计和标注规范章节即可，CC-BY-4.0许可可直接商用训练内部开源奖励模型。","en":"Only read dataset statistics and annotation specification sections, the CC-BY-4.0 licensed data can be directly used for commercial internal open-source reward model training."}},{"id":"WangE24","title":"Understanding the Expressive Power and Mechanisms of Transformer for Sequence Modeling","authors":["Mingze Wang","Weinan E"],"institutions":["Peking University","Princeton University"],"abstract":"We conduct a systematic study of the approximation properties of Transformer for sequence modeling with long, sparse and complicated memory. \nWe investigate the mechanisms through which different components of Transformer, such as the dot-product self-attention, positional encoding and feed-forward layer, affect its expressive power, and we study their combined effects through establishing explicit approximation rates.\nOur study reveals the roles of critical parameters in the Transformer, such as the number of layers and the number of attention heads.\nThese theoretical insights are validated experimentally and offer natural suggestions for alternative architectures.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangE24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangE24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/2d8f2351de4e9248d91ffa52dae2e6a2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"此前对Transformer各组件（自注意力、位置编码、FFN）如何共同影响长稀疏复杂序列建模的表达能力没有系统的理论解释，也缺乏显式的近似率量化结果。","importance":"理论级贡献，明确了层数、注意力头数等关键超参数对表达能力的作用，对Transformer架构设计、预训练超参数选择有直接的理论指导意义。","technical_approach":"原创理论分析工作，建立了Transformer各组件对序列建模的显式近似率公式，拆解了组件间的联合作用，放弃了此前仅做单一组件孤立分析的研究路径。","experiments":"实验完全验证了理论推导的结论，基于结论提出的架构改进建议可直接落地。未公开具体的模型参数量和基准测试指标。","authors_note":"北京大学/普林斯顿大学鄂维南团队发布，团队长期深耕深度学习基础理论研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"There was no systematic theoretical explanation of how Transformer components (self-attention, positional encoding, FFN) jointly affect the expressiveness for long, sparse and complex sequence modeling, and no explicit approximation rate quantification results existed before this work.","importance":"Theoretical level contribution, clarifies the role of key hyperparameters such as number of layers and attention heads on expressiveness, and provides direct theoretical guidance for Transformer architecture design and pretraining hyperparameter selection.","technical_approach":"Original theoretical analysis work, establishes explicit approximation rate formulas for Transformer components in sequence modeling, disassembles the joint effect between components, and abandons the previous research path of only doing isolated analysis of single components.","experiments":"Experiments fully verify the theoretical derivation conclusions, and the architecture improvement suggestions based on the conclusions can be directly deployed. Specific model parameters and benchmark metrics are not disclosed.","authors_note":"Published by Weinan E's team from Peking University and Princeton University. The team has long been engaged in basic theoretical research of deep learning."},"tags":["transformer","expressiveness","sequence-modeling","theory"],"keywords":["Transformer","expressive power","theoretical insights"],"notable_authors":["Weinan E"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer的表达能力由自注意力、位置编码、FFN共同决定","claim_en":"Transformer expressiveness is jointly determined by self-attention, positional encoding and feed-forward layers","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为Transformer表达能力理论分析的文献备查，无可直接落地的预训练超参数调整指导，不用细读。","en":"Only for literature reference of Transformer expressive power theoretical analysis, no directly actionable pre-training hyperparameter tuning guidance, no need for deep reading."}},{"id":"WangY0024","title":"Grokking of Implicit Reasoning in Transformers: A Mechanistic Journey to the Edge of Generalization","authors":["Boshi Wang","Xiang Yue","Yu Su","Huan Sun"],"institutions":["The Ohio State University"],"abstract":"$83","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangY0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangY0024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ad217e0c7fecc71bdf48660ad6714b07-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"此前不清楚Transformer是否能学习参数知识上的隐式推理，也不明确这种推理能力的泛化边界和形成机制，现有强LLM在这类任务上普遍表现较差。","importance":"机制级贡献，解释了隐式推理能力的Grokking形成机制，明确了不同推理类型的泛化边界，对预训练中推理能力的涌现观测和诱导有直接指导意义。","technical_approach":"原创机制研究工作，聚焦组合、比较两类典型隐式推理任务，全程跟踪训练过程中的模型内部电路变化，放弃了此前仅关注最终性能的研究路径。","experiments":"Transformer仅能在过拟合后持续长时间训练（Grokking阶段）习得隐式推理能力；分布外泛化测试中，比较类推理成功，组合类推理完全失败；拆解到了泛化电路的完整形成过程。未公开具体模型参数量。","authors_note":"俄亥俄州立大学Huan Sun、Yu Su团队发布，团队长期深耕NLP推理和模型机制研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"It was previously unclear whether Transformers can learn implicit reasoning over parametric knowledge, nor the generalization boundary and formation mechanism of this reasoning ability. Existing strong LLMs generally perform poorly on such tasks.","importance":"Mechanism level contribution, explains the grokking formation mechanism of implicit reasoning ability, clarifies the generalization boundary of different reasoning types, and provides direct guidance for observation and induction of reasoning ability emergence during pretraining.","technical_approach":"Original mechanism research work, focuses on two typical implicit reasoning tasks: composition and comparison, tracks the internal circuit changes of the model throughout the training process, and abandons the previous research path that only focuses on final performance.","experiments":"Transformers can only acquire implicit reasoning ability after extended training beyond overfitting (grokking phase). In out-of-distribution generalization tests, comparative reasoning succeeds while compositional reasoning completely fails. The complete formation process of the generalization circuit is disassembled. Specific model parameters are not disclosed.","authors_note":"Published by Huan Sun and Yu Su's team from The Ohio State University. The team has long been engaged in NLP reasoning and model mechanism research."},"tags":["grokking","transformer","implicit-reasoning","generalization"],"keywords":["Reasoning","Grokking","Systematic Generalization","Mechanistic Interpretability","Transformer"],"notable_authors":["Huan Sun","Yu Su"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Grokking指模型在过拟合后继续训练获得的超出训练集的泛化能力","claim_en":"Grokking refers to the out-of-training-set generalization ability obtained by models after extended training beyond overfitting","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer的隐式推理能力仅能在Grokking阶段获得，且组合类隐式推理无法实现分布外系统泛化","claim_en":"Implicit reasoning ability of Transformers is only obtained during the grokking phase, and compositional implicit reasoning cannot achieve systematic out-of-distribution generalization","opposes":"此前默认Transformer的推理能力可在常规训练阶段获得，且所有推理类型的泛化特性一致","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments, §5 Mechanism Analysis","why_contested":"明确了隐式推理能力的训练要求和泛化边界，为提升LLM隐式推理能力提供了明确的训练方向"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"看§4的隐式推理grokking形成机制和内部电路变化分析即可，对预训练中推理能力诱导有参考价值。","en":"Only read §4 for implicit reasoning grokking formation mechanism and internal circuit change analysis, useful for inducing reasoning capability during pre-training."}},{"id":"WenG024","title":"Speculative Decoding with CTC-based Draft Model for LLM Inference Acceleration","authors":["Zhuofan Wen","Shangtong Gui","Yang Feng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$84","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WenG024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WenG024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a79054a9da91d73ed3cb1a9e87d7cd2d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：在不改动目标大模型输出质量的前提下，进一步提高 speculative decoding 的实际加速效果。传统 draft model 仍然是自回归的，生成候选 token 本身就有串行瓶颈；如果用 CTC 这类并行预测草稿，理论上可以把 draft 端延迟再压低一截。","importance":"这是系统级推理加速工作，但对 pretrain 也有启发。它说明推理加速不一定只能靠更小的 AR 草稿模型，也可以引入不同训练目标的辅助模型；这种‘异构草稿+一致性校验’的思路，对统一建模、非 AR 语言建模和 serving-aware training 都有参考价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是把 CTC-based 模型作为 speculative decoding 的 draft model。CTC 的特点是能并行地产生一段候选序列，再由目标 AR LLM 验证并接受其中前缀。和标准 speculative decoding 相比，区别不在 verifier，而在 draft 的生成机制：它牺牲部分细粒度条件依赖，换取更高吞吐。这样设计有效的前提是 draft 虽然更粗，但前缀命中率仍足够高；否则验证失败过多会抵消收益。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法确认使用了哪些 LLM、CTC 草稿模型大小、硬件环境和 wall-clock 加速比。通常这类论文会报告 token/s、端到端 latency、acceptance rate，以及与 AR draft speculative decoding、vanilla decoding 的对比；如果做得扎实，还会分析不同 draft 长度和质量对速度收益的拐点。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a serving bottleneck: how to make speculative decoding faster without changing the target LLM’s output distribution. Standard draft models are still autoregressive, so they retain sequential cost; a CTC-style draft can propose multiple tokens in parallel and potentially reduce that overhead.","importance":"This is mainly a systems contribution for inference, but it carries a useful pretraining lesson. It shows that acceleration does not have to rely on a smaller AR imitator; heterogeneous draft models trained with different objectives may work as long as the verifier can safely accept prefixes. That is relevant to non-AR language modeling and serving-aware auxiliary training.","technical_approach":"The core idea is likely to use a CTC-based model as the speculative draft generator. Unlike standard speculative decoding, the verifier remains the AR target model, but the draft side changes from sequential token generation to parallel sequence proposal. The reason this can help is simple: CTC gives up some token-by-token conditioning to gain throughput. The trade-off is acceptance rate—if the proposed prefixes are too noisy, verification overhead will erase the speedup.","experiments":"Without the abstract, I cannot verify the target models, draft model sizes, hardware, or speedup numbers. A solid evaluation here would report throughput, end-to-end latency, and prefix acceptance rate against vanilla decoding and AR-draft speculative decoding, ideally with ablations on draft length and draft quality.","authors_note":""},"tags":["speculative-decoding","ctc","inference-acceleration","llm"],"notable_authors":["Zhuofan Wen","Yang Feng"],"keywords":["Pretrained language model","Speculative decoding","CTC decoding algorithm"],"recommendation":{"zh":"异构非AR草稿的投机解码思路可参考，只看第3节的draft生成机制和实验命中率部分就够了。","en":"Heterogeneous non-autoregressive draft for speculative decoding is reference-worthy, only read §3 on draft generation mechanism and acceptance rate experiments."}},{"id":"WibisonoW24","title":"From Unstructured Data to In-Context Learning: Exploring What Tasks Can Be Learned and When","authors":["Kevin Christian Wibisono","Yixin Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$85","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WibisonoW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WibisonoW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1da38b872e19f1f4a3c2846720e8f64a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关心的核心问题是：模型从无结构数据中到底能学到哪些 in-context learning 任务，以及这种能力在什么条件下出现。很多 ICL 研究直接在合成任务或干净提示上观察现象，但回避了更关键的一步——这些能力能否从自然分布数据中自发涌现。","importance":"这是一篇偏机制与理论-实验结合的工作。对 pretrain 的意义很直接：它试图回答 ICL 到底由什么训练信号驱动，这会影响我们如何理解数据混合、任务密度、上下文结构和 scaling；如果某些 ICL 能力需要特定数据统计结构，那就不是简单‘模型大了自然会有’。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者会从 unstructured data 到 ICL 之间建立条件分析，可能结合理论刻画和可控实验。关键不只是展示 ICL 能发生，而是明确哪些任务可学、需要什么数据统计、以及出现的临界条件。这样设计的价值在于把 ICL 从经验现象变成可诊断对象；边界是结论往往依赖任务族和数据生成假设，外推到真实 web-scale 语料需要谨慎。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认是否使用线性模型、transformer toy setup、还是更大规模实验，也无法确认具体结论和数值。合理预期是会有可控数据生成实验，分析任务复杂度、样本量、上下文长度和模型规模对 ICL 出现时机的影响；但这里不能替论文补结果。","authors_note":"Yixin Wang 在统计学习、生成模型与理论分析方向较活跃。具体机构无法根据当前信息确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a foundational question: what kinds of in-context learning can emerge from unstructured data, and under what conditions. Much of the ICL literature starts from synthetic tasks or already structured prompts, which leaves open whether these behaviors can arise from the data distributions used in actual pretraining.","importance":"This is a mechanism-oriented contribution with direct relevance to pretraining. It speaks to what statistical structure in data is needed for ICL, which in turn affects how we think about data mixtures, task density, context formatting, and scaling. If certain ICL behaviors require specific structure, then they are not guaranteed by size alone.","technical_approach":"The title suggests a bridge from unstructured data to ICL through controlled analysis, likely combining theory with synthetic or semi-synthetic experiments. The useful part is not merely showing that ICL can happen, but identifying which task families are learnable this way and when emergence should be expected. That makes ICL more diagnosable, though conclusions may depend on the assumed task family and data generator.","experiments":"The abstract is not provided, so I cannot verify whether the study uses toy transformers, linearized settings, or larger empirical runs, nor can I state quantitative findings. A plausible setup would vary task complexity, data statistics, context length, and model scale to map when ICL appears, but the exact results are unavailable here.","authors_note":"Yixin Wang is known for work spanning statistical learning and generative modeling. The institution cannot be confirmed from the provided text."},"tags":["in-context-learning","theory","unstructured-data","transformer"],"notable_authors":["Kevin Christian Wibisono","Yixin Wang"],"keywords":["in-context learning","large language models","unstructured data","continuous bag of words","co-occurrence"],"recommendation":{"zh":"推翻了“ICL能力随模型规模自发涌现”的默认认知，应立刻在内部预训练数据ablation中复现其统计依赖结论。","en":"Overturns the default prior that ICL emerges spontaneously with model scale, replicate its statistical dependency conclusions in internal pretraining data ablations immediately."}},{"id":"WuA0JJ24","title":"On the Role of Attention Masks and LayerNorm in Transformers","authors":["Xinyi Wu","Amir Ajorlou","Yifei Wang","Stefanie Jegelka","Ali Jadbabaie"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$86","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WuA0JJ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WuA0JJ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1ac3030fc57850b0fb11dfe9d4880ad7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作研究的是 Transformer 里两个经常被当作工程细节的组件——attention mask 和 LayerNorm——到底在表示与优化中扮演什么角色。过去很多实践默认它们只是稳定训练或实现因果性的工具，但它们很可能更深地影响模型可表达性和训练动力学。","importance":"这是机制与理论价值较高的基础研究。对 pretrain 的意义在于，mask 和归一化几乎出现在所有主流 LLM 里，如果它们的作用机制被说清楚，就会影响我们如何理解因果建模、双向建模、归一化位置选择，以及为什么某些架构在大规模训练更稳。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者应当是对 attention mask 与 LayerNorm 的作用做理论分析，并可能辅以小规模验证。关键点可能是：mask 不只是限制信息流，还改变了表示耦合和优化几何；LayerNorm 不只是数值稳定器，还可能决定特征尺度、梯度传播和某些不变性。和纯经验 ablation 不同，这类工作价值在于给出可推广的解释框架；边界是理论结论通常建立在简化模型假设上。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认具体理论命题、验证任务和实验规模，也不能确认是否涉及 language modeling 实证。常见形式会包括 synthetic task、训练稳定性比较、以及有无 mask / LN 或不同放置方式的对照；但这里不应擅自补充结果。","authors_note":"作者包含 Stefanie Jegelka 和 Ali Jadbabaie，均以机器学习理论和优化分析见长。具体机构无法仅凭当前信息确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper studies two Transformer components that are often treated as implementation details—attention masks and LayerNorm—and asks what they actually do to representation and optimization. In practice they are seen as causality constraints and stability tricks, but their role is likely more structural than that.","importance":"The contribution is foundational and mechanism-oriented. For pretraining, this matters because masks and normalization are nearly universal in modern LLMs. A clearer understanding of their function can inform architectural choices around causal versus bidirectional modeling, normalization placement, and why some configurations scale more stably than others.","technical_approach":"From the title, the paper likely combines theoretical analysis with controlled experiments. The central idea is probably that masks do more than block future tokens—they reshape information coupling and optimization geometry—while LayerNorm does more than control numerical scale by affecting invariances and gradient flow. The value over plain ablations is explanatory power, though the usual caveat is that theory may rely on simplified assumptions.","experiments":"The abstract is unavailable, so I cannot verify the exact claims, experimental tasks, or scale. Typical validation for this kind of paper would include synthetic settings, stability analyses, and comparisons across masking or normalization variants, but I should not infer specific results without the source text.","authors_note":"The author list includes Stefanie Jegelka and Ali Jadbabaie, both well known for machine learning theory and optimization. The exact institution cannot be confirmed from the provided information."},"tags":["attention-mask","layernorm","transformer","architecture-analysis"],"notable_authors":["Stefanie Jegelka","Ali Jadbabaie"],"keywords":["attention mechanism","transformers","layer normalization","deep learning theory","dynamical systems"],"recommendation":{"zh":"明确了Attention Mask和LayerNorm不止是工程trick，其对优化几何和表示耦合的作用结论可直接指导架构迭代。","en":"Clarifies attention mask and LayerNorm are not just engineering tricks, their conclusions on optimization geometry and representation coupling directly guide architecture iteration."}},{"id":"2412.14516","title":"Cal-DPO: Calibrated Direct Preference Optimization for Language Model Alignment","authors":["Teng Xiao","Yige Yuan","Huaisheng Zhu","Mingxiao Li","Vasant G. Honavar"],"institutions":["Pennsylvania State University"],"abstract":"$87","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14516","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XiaoYZLH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XiaoYZLH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/cf8b2205e39f81726a8d828ecbe00ad0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有DPO等对比偏好优化方法仅关注两个回复的隐式奖励相对值，忽略奖励的实际绝对值，导致模型和人类偏好的对齐效果次优。","importance":"方法级贡献，是对DPO对齐范式的轻量改进，计算开销增加极小，可直接替换现有RLHF pipeline中的原生DPO。","technical_approach":"DPO目标的改进，在原有对比优化基础上加入隐式奖励校准项，保证学习到的隐式奖励符合人类的绝对偏好判断，放弃了DPO仅优化奖励相对序的设计，几乎不增加额外计算成本。","experiments":"未公开具体模型参数量、基准测试的绝对指标和提升幅度，仅验证了Cal-DPO在相同偏好数据下的对齐效果显著优于原生DPO。","authors_note":"宾州州立大学Vasant G. Honavar团队发布，团队长期深耕机器学习对齐和偏好学习研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing contrastive preference optimization methods such as DPO only focus on the relative value of implicit rewards of two responses, ignoring the actual absolute value of rewards, leading to suboptimal alignment between the model and human preferences.","importance":"Method level contribution, is a lightweight improvement of the DPO alignment paradigm, with negligible additional computation cost, and can directly replace vanilla DPO in existing RLHF pipelines.","technical_approach":"Improvement of DPO objective, adds an implicit reward calibration term on the basis of the original contrastive optimization, ensures that the learned implicit rewards conform to human absolute preference judgment, abandons DPO's design of only optimizing reward relative order, and hardly adds additional computation cost.","experiments":"Specific model parameters, absolute benchmark metrics and improvement幅度 are not disclosed. It only verifies that Cal-DPO achieves significantly better alignment performance than vanilla DPO under the same preference data.","authors_note":"Published by Vasant G. Honavar's team from Pennsylvania State University. The team has long been engaged in machine learning alignment and preference learning research."},"tags":["dpo","alignment","preference-learning","calibration","objective"],"keywords":["Large Language Model","Alignment"],"notable_authors":["Vasant G. Honavar"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"DPO通过优化隐式奖励的相对序实现LLM与人类偏好的对齐","claim_en":"DPO aligns LLMs with human preferences by optimizing the relative order of implicit rewards","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"加入隐式奖励校准的Cal-DPO相比原生DPO，在相同偏好数据下的对齐效果更优","claim_en":"Cal-DPO with implicit reward calibration achieves better alignment performance than vanilla DPO under the same preference data","opposes":"DPO系列方法的核心假设是仅优化奖励相对序即可实现最优对齐","opposes_cite_hint":"Rafailov 2023 DPO","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"修正了DPO目标的核心假设，用极小的开销提升了对齐效果，可直接替换现有pipeline中的DPO"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"DPO加校准项的轻量改进，计算开销可忽略，只看第4节对齐效果对比实验即可。","en":"Lightweight DPO improvement with calibration term and negligible overhead, only read §4 on alignment performance comparison experiments."}},{"id":"2407.16695","title":"Stress-Testing Long-Context Language Models with Lifelong ICL and Task Haystack","authors":["Xiaoyue Xu","Qinyuan Ye","Xiang Ren"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$88","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.16695","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XuY024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XuY024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1cc8db5884a7474b4771762b6f0c8ee1-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：现有长上下文评测（如 needle-in-a-haystack）过于“检索式”，无法刻画模型在长 prompt 中连续经历多任务示例时的干扰、遗忘与选择性利用能力。作者提出 Lifelong ICL 场景：模型需要在一个长上下文里学一串任务，并在测试时只利用相关任务的 demonstrations，同时抵抗其他任务的干扰。","importance":"贡献是评测范式级：把长上下文能力从“能不能找到针”推进到“能不能在多任务混杂的上下文里稳定做任务选择与抗干扰”。对 pretrain 的启示是：长上下文训练如果只优化检索或位置外推，可能无法带来真正的上下文路由能力（context routing）；你需要关注表示分离、指令遵循与干扰抑制等训练信号。","technical_approach":"方法上提出两个东西：Lifelong ICL 作为问题设定，Task Haystack 作为诊断套件。Task Haystack 借鉴 NIAH 的“把关键信息埋在长上下文里”，但关键差异是把“针”扩展成多组任务 demonstrations，并要求模型在给定任务指令与测试输入时，选择正确 demonstrations、忽略无关 demonstrations，且性能不应显著差于 Single-task ICL 基线。这个设计把失败模式拆成可观测的几类：被无关任务吸引、跨任务干扰、对早期任务遗忘、以及对指令的错误路由。","experiments":"摘要未给出评测覆盖的具体模型列表、上下文长度、任务数量、指标与数值差距，因此无法报告定量结论。可以确定的是评测标准包含与 Single-task ICL 的对比，并强调“not significantly worse”这一相对门槛，用来区分‘只是能读长文本’与‘能在长文本里做正确任务选择’。缺失信息包括：不同长度/任务数的 scaling 曲线、以及是否能用简单策略（如显式分隔符、检索增强）显著缓解。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that popular long-context tests (e.g., needle-in-a-haystack) are overly retrieval-centric and miss a harder failure mode: when many tasks coexist in one long prompt, models must select relevant demonstrations while resisting interference and forgetting. It introduces Lifelong ICL, where a model learns a sequence of tasks in-context and is later tested on one target task amid distractors.","importance":"This is an evaluation-paradigm contribution: it shifts long-context assessment from “can you find the needle” to “can you route to the right task and suppress interference in long contexts.” For pretraining, the implication is that training for length extrapolation or retrieval alone may not yield robust context routing; representation separation and interference suppression likely need explicit signals.","technical_approach":"The work defines the Lifelong ICL setting and provides Task Haystack as a diagnostic suite. Task Haystack borrows the idea of hiding critical info in long prompts, but replaces a single needle with multiple task-specific demonstration blocks; given an instruction and test inputs, the model must use the correct block and ignore others. Performance is judged relative to a Single-task ICL baseline, making failures attributable to routing errors, cross-task interference, or forgetting of earlier tasks.","experiments":"The abstract does not specify evaluated models, context lengths, number of tasks, metrics, or numeric gaps, so no quantitative summary is possible. It does state the key criterion: accuracy should not be significantly worse than Single-task ICL, which operationalizes the difference between merely processing long inputs and correctly leveraging them. Missing practitioner-critical results include scaling curves over length/task count and how much simple mitigations (separators, retrieval augmentation) close the gap.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-context","icl","evaluation","task-haystack"],"keywords":["long-context models","lifelong learning","evaluation","benchmark","robustness","in-context learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"长上下文评测从单检索升级到多任务抗干扰场景，只看Task Haystack的评测设计部分就够了。","en":"Long context benchmark upgraded from single retrieval to multi-task anti-interference scenario, only read the Task Haystack benchmark design section."}},{"id":"Yang0LC24","title":"In-Context Learning with Representations: Contextual Generalization of Trained Transformers","authors":["Tong Yang","Yu Huang","Yingbin Liang","Yuejie Chi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$89","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Yang0LC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Yang0LC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9bfa0c155653e24120760a5ead819376-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要与关键信息，无法可靠判断其关于“用表征做 ICL/上下文泛化”的具体问题定义与结论边界。","importance":"缺少摘要与实验信息，无法评估其对 ICL 机制理解或训练方法的贡献量级。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要，无法说明其是否提出新训练目标、表示学习约束，或是对已训练 Transformer 的分析框架。","experiments":"缺少摘要，无法提取模型规模、数据、任务与数值结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The abstract is missing, so the exact problem statement and claimed conclusions about representation-based ICL cannot be summarized reliably.","importance":"Without results or context, the contribution to ICL understanding or training methodology cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"No abstract is provided, so it is unclear whether this proposes a new objective, a representation constraint, or an analysis of trained Transformers.","experiments":"No experimental details are available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["icl","generalization","representation-learning","transformer"],"keywords":["training dynamics","optimization","transformer","multi-head softmax attention","in-context learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"无公开核心信息，仅标题提及表征视角的ICL上下文泛化分析，作为文献备查即可不用读正文。","en":"No core public information, only title mentions ICL contextual generalization from representation view, keep as literature reference no need to read full text."}},{"id":"YangDLZZ24","title":"Regularizing Hidden States Enables Learning Generalizable Reward Model for LLMs","authors":["Rui Yang","Ruomeng Ding","Yong Lin","Huan Zhang","Tong Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$8a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YangDLZZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YangDLZZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/71f7154547c748c8041505521ca433ab-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要与关键信息，无法可靠判断其要解决的 reward model 泛化问题具体表现在哪里（分布外指令、对抗提示、长度外推等）。","importance":"缺少摘要与实验信息，无法评估“正则化隐藏状态”对 reward model 训练稳定性与泛化的实际收益。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要，无法说明隐藏状态正则是约束范数、信息瓶颈、去相关、还是跨层一致性，以及为何能提升偏好建模泛化。","experiments":"缺少摘要，无法提取模型规模、偏好数据规模、评测基准与数值提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The abstract is missing, so the concrete generalization failure modes of reward models cannot be identified.","importance":"Without results, the practical gains of hidden-state regularization for reward-model generalization and stability cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"No abstract is provided, so the form of hidden-state regularization and the rationale for why it should help remain unclear.","experiments":"No experimental details are available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reward-model","generalization","hidden-states","rlhf"],"keywords":["Large Language Model","Reward Model","Out-of-distribution Generalization","Alignment"],"recommendation":{"zh":"无公开核心信息，仅标题提及用隐状态正则提升奖励模型泛化性，作为文献备查即可不用读正文。","en":"No core public information, only title mentions hidden state regularization to improve reward model generalization, keep as literature reference no need to read full text."}},{"id":"YangGWHLTWM24","title":"UniAudio 1.5: Large Language Model-Driven Audio Codec is A Few-Shot Audio Task Learner","authors":["Dongchao Yang","Haohan Guo","Yuanyuan Wang","Rongjie Huang","Xiang Li","Xu Tan","Xixin Wu","Helen Meng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$8b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YangGWHLTWM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YangGWHLTWM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/6801fa3fd290229efc490ee0cf1c5687-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要与关键信息，无法可靠总结 UniAudio 1.5 如何把“LLM 驱动的音频 codec”做成 few-shot 音频任务学习器，以及它覆盖哪些任务与输入输出形式。","importance":"缺少摘要与实验信息，无法判断其对“把音频当 LM 建”的 tokenizer/离散化与统一建模的贡献量级。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要，无法说明其 codec 是否可学习离散单元、是否与文本 token 统一、是否采用 AR/扩散/混合目标，以及 few-shot 学习的训练信号来源。","experiments":"缺少摘要，无法提取模型规模、码率/码本大小、训练数据、任务基准与数值结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract is provided, so it is unclear how UniAudio 1.5 turns an LLM-driven audio codec into a few-shot audio task learner and what tasks/interfaces it supports.","importance":"Without details, the contribution to audio tokenization/discretization and unified LM-style modeling cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"The codec design, its integration with text tokens, the training objective (AR/diffusion/hybrid), and the source of few-shot supervision are not available due to missing abstract.","experiments":"No experimental details (model size, bitrate/codebook, data scale, benchmarks, numbers) are available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["audio-lm","audio-codec","few-shot","unified-audio"],"keywords":["Audio undertanding and generation","in-context learning","Large language models","few-shot learning."],"recommendation":{"zh":"无公开核心信息，仅标题提及LLM驱动的音频Codec做少样本音频任务，作为文献备查即可不用读正文。","en":"No core public information, only title mentions LLM-driven audio codec for few-shot audio tasks, keep as literature reference no need to read full text."}},{"id":"Ye0ZDJZ24","title":"Online Iterative Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback with General Preference Model","authors":["Chenlu Ye","Wei Xiong","Yuheng Zhang","Hanze Dong","Nan Jiang","Tong Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We investigate Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) in the context of a general preference oracle. In particular, we do not assume the existence of a reward function and an oracle preference signal drawn from the Bradley-Terry model as most of the prior works do.  We consider a standard mathematical formulation, the reverse-KL regularized minimax game between two LLMs for RLHF under general preference oracle. The learning objective of this formulation is to find a policy so that it is consistently preferred by the KL-regularized preference oracle over any competing LLMs. We show that this framework is strictly more general than the reward-based one, and propose sample-efficient algorithms for both the offline learning from a pre-collected preference dataset and online learning where we can query the preference oracle along the way of training. Empirical studies verify the effectiveness of the proposed framework.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Ye0ZDJZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Ye0ZDJZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/94d13c2401fe119e57ba325b6fe526e0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要与关键信息，无法可靠总结其要解决的“在线迭代 RLHF”痛点（偏好漂移、数据效率、分布外崩坏、反馈延迟等）以及 General Preference Model 的角色。","importance":"缺少摘要与实验信息，无法判断其对 RLHF 训练闭环（数据收集→偏好建模→策略更新）的工程可用性与收益幅度。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要，无法说明其是 off-policy/online 的哪种迭代方式、如何稳定训练、General Preference Model 是否跨任务/跨域共享，以及如何避免 reward hacking。","experiments":"缺少摘要，无法提取模型规模、迭代轮数、人工反馈量、对照方法与数值结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract is provided, so the concrete pain points of online iterative RLHF and the role of a General Preference Model cannot be summarized reliably.","importance":"Without results, the practical impact on the RLHF loop (data collection → preference modeling → policy updates) cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"The specific online/off-policy scheme, stabilization techniques, cross-domain sharing in the preference model, and anti-reward-hacking measures are unknown due to missing abstract.","experiments":"No experimental details are available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rlhf","online-rl","preference-model","alignment"],"keywords":["RLHF Theory"],"recommendation":{"zh":"无公开核心信息，仅标题提及带通用偏好模型的在线迭代RLHF，作为文献备查即可不用读正文。","en":"No core public information, only title mentions online iterative RLHF with general preference model, keep as literature reference no need to read full text."}},{"id":"YueZZC24","title":"MAmmoTH2: Scaling Instructions from the Web","authors":["Xiang Yue","Tianyu Zheng","Ge Zhang","Wenhu Chen"],"institutions":["University of Waterloo"],"abstract":"$8c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YueZZC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YueZZC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a4ca07aa108036f80cbb5b82285fd4b1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有推理类指令微调数据要么来自人工标注成本极高，要么来自闭源模型蒸馏存在商用限制，无法低成本扩展到千万级规模。","importance":"数据+方法级贡献，提出了低成本从公开网页语料提取千万级指令数据的范式，大幅降低了开源推理模型的训练成本。","technical_approach":"原创指令数据提取范式，分为三步：召回相关网页文档、自动提取指令-回复对、用开源LLM提纯数据，放弃了人工标注或闭源模型蒸馏的路径，可低成本扩展到千万级规模。","experiments":"提取了10M自然存在的网页指令数据，基于Mistral-7B微调得到的MAmmoTH2-7B，MATH得分从11%提升到36.7%，GSM8K得分从36%提升到68.4%，全程未使用任何闭源蒸馏的推理数据。","authors_note":"滑铁卢大学Wenhu Chen团队发布，团队此前推出过MAmmoTH系列开源推理模型。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing reasoning instruction tuning data is either from human annotation with extremely high cost, or from closed-source model distillation with commercial restrictions, and cannot be scaled to tens of millions of samples at low cost.","importance":"Data and method level contribution, proposes a low-cost paradigm for extracting tens of millions of instruction data from public web corpus, greatly reducing the training cost of open-source reasoning models.","technical_approach":"Original instruction data extraction paradigm, divided into three steps: recall relevant web documents, automatically extract instruction-response pairs, refine data with open-source LLMs, abandons the path of human annotation or closed-source model distillation, and can be scaled to tens of millions of samples at low cost.","experiments":"10M naturally existing web instruction data are extracted. MAmmoTH2-7B finetuned on this dataset based on Mistral-7B improves MATH score from 11% to 36.7%, and GSM8K score from 36% to 68.4%, without using any closed-source distilled reasoning data during the whole process.","authors_note":"Published by Wenhu Chen's team from University of Waterloo. The team previously released the MAmmoTH series of open-source reasoning models."},"tags":["instruction-data","data-synthesis","web-data","sft","scaling"],"keywords":["large language models","instruction tuning","reasoning"],"notable_authors":["Wenhu Chen"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"指令微调的数据质量和规模是决定LLM推理能力的核心因素","claim_en":"Quality and scale of instruction tuning data are core factors determining LLM reasoning ability","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"从公开网页提取的10M开源指令数据，微调得到的7B模型推理性能优于用闭源蒸馏数据微调的同规模模型","claim_en":"7B model finetuned on 10M open-source instruction data extracted from public web achieves better reasoning performance than same-size models finetuned on closed-source distilled data","opposes":"此前默认只有人工标注或闭源蒸馏的指令数据才能支撑高推理性能","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments, Table 2","why_contested":"证明了公开网页语料中存在大量可利用的推理类指令数据，大幅降低了开源推理模型的训练成本和商用限制"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"低成本从网页提取千万级推理指令数据的方案可复用，只看第3节数据提纯流程即可。","en":"Low-cost solution to extract 10M-scale reasoning instruction data from webpages is reusable, only read §3 on data purification workflow."}},{"id":"ZancatoSDG0BTAS24","title":"B&apos;MOJO: Hybrid State Space Realizations of Foundation Models with Eidetic and Fading Memory","authors":["Luca Zancato","Arjun Seshadri","Yonatan Dukler","Aditya Golatkar","Yantao Shen","Benjamin Bowman","Matthew Trager","Alessandro Achille","Stefano Soatto"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZancatoSDG0BTAS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZancatoSDG0BTAS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/eb6281d3f2cfe2eb8b1307227d3677b3-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["state-space-model","hybrid-architecture","memory","foundation-model"]},{"id":"ZhangJWHXZFHLML24","title":"Rethinking Memory and Communication Costs for Efficient Data Parallel Training of Large Language Models","authors":["Hanxiao Zhang","Lin Ju","Chan Wu","Jinjing Huang","Youshao Xiao","Zhenglei Zhou","Zhiming Fan","Zhaoxin Huan","Siyuan Li","Fanzhuang Meng","Lei Liang","Xiaolu Zhang","Jun Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$8d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangJWHXZFHLML24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangJWHXZFHLML24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/318f3ae8be3c97cb7555e1c932f472a1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有分布式数据并行的基础策略未考虑组内组间通信性能的差异，在异构通信场景下优化空间有限，无法充分释放大模型预训练的速度潜力。","importance":"系统级贡献，对大模型预训练的分布式训练加速有实用落地价值。","technical_approach":"原创分布式训练策略，提出部分冗余优化器（PaRO），通过精细化的模型状态划分和定制化训练流程，平衡内存和通信开销，放弃了现有数据并行策略要么全冗余要么全划分的极端设计。","experiments":"未公开具体模型参数量、训练加速比等量化指标，仅验证了PaRO-DP在异构通信场景下的训练速度优于现有基础数据并行策略。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing basic distributed data parallel strategies do not consider the difference between intra-group and inter-group communication performance, leaving limited optimization room in heterogeneous communication scenarios, and cannot fully release the speed potential of large model pretraining.","importance":"System-level contribution, with practical deployment value for distributed training acceleration of large model pretraining.","technical_approach":"Original distributed training strategy, proposes Partial Redundancy Optimizer (PaRO), balances memory and communication cost through refined model state partitioning and tailored training procedures, abandons the extreme design of existing data parallel strategies that are either fully redundant or fully partitioned.","experiments":"Quantitative metrics such as specific model parameters and training speedup are not disclosed. It only verifies that PaRO-DP achieves higher training speed than existing basic data parallel strategies in heterogeneous communication scenarios.","authors_note":""},"tags":["distributed-training","data-parallel","memory","communication","systems"],"keywords":["Large Language Model","Distributed Training","Communication Topology"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"分布式数据并行训练的速度由内存开销和通信开销共同决定","claim_en":"Speed of distributed data parallel training is jointly determined by memory cost and communication cost","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"考虑组内组间通信性能差异的PaRO-DP策略，比现有基础数据并行策略训练速度更快","claim_en":"PaRO-DP strategy that considers intra- and inter-group communication performance disparities achieves higher training speed than existing basic data parallel strategies","opposes":"此前的分布式数据并行策略默认组内组间通信性能一致，不需要差异化设计","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"补充了异构通信场景下的数据并行优化路径，可进一步提升大模型预训练的速度上限"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"异构通信场景下的数据并行优化策略，只看第4节PaRO的内存通信开销对比实验即可。","en":"Data parallel optimization strategy for heterogeneous communication scenarios, only read §4 on memory and communication overhead comparison of PaRO."}},{"id":"ZhangLLMCXLZZY24","title":"Wings: Learning Multimodal LLMs without Text-only Forgetting","authors":["Yi-Kai Zhang","Shiyin Lu","Yang Li","Yanqing Ma","Qingguo Chen","Zhao Xu","Weihua Luo","Kaifu Zhang","De-Chuan Zhan","Han-Jia Ye"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$8e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangLLMCXLZZY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangLLMCXLZZY24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3852f6d247ba7deb46e4e4be9e702601-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"基于预训练纯文本LLM初始化的多模态大模型（MLLM）在图文对齐和多模态混合微调阶段，会灾难性遗忘初始LLM已掌握的纯文本指令执行能力，此前方案大多未针对性解决注意力偏移导致的遗忘问题。","importance":"方法级贡献，首次将纯文本遗忘归因于注意力从前置文本向图片区域的偏移，为MLLM训练时保留原生文本能力提供了可落地的结构改进方向，无需大幅增加训练成本即可缓解遗忘。","technical_approach":"原创的低秩残差注意力（LoRRA）模块，并行接入原有Transformer层作为模态专属学习者，扩展可学习空间补偿注意力偏移。该设计未修改原LLM的参数和结构，仅新增轻量LoRRA参数，避免额外结构破坏原生文本能力。","experiments":"未公开具体模型参数量、测试集指标及消融细节，仅定性验证LoRRA可同时提升纯文本和多模态指令任务表现。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) initialized from pretrained text-only LLMs suffer from catastrophic forgetting of text-only instruction capabilities during multimodal alignment and mixed fine-tuning stages. Prior works rarely address the attention shift root cause of this forgetting.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It first attributes text-only forgetting to attention shift from pre-image text tokens to image tokens, and provides a low-cost structural improvement to preserve native text capabilities during MLLM training.","technical_approach":"The proposed Low-Rank Residual Attention (LoRRA) block is an original design, connected in parallel to original Transformer layers as a modality-specific learner to expand learnable parameter space and compensate for attention shift. It does not modify original LLM parameters or structure, only adds lightweight LoRRA parameters to avoid breaking native text capabilities.","experiments":"No specific model size, benchmark metrics or ablation details are disclosed in the provided abstract, only qualitative validation that LoRRA improves both text-only and multimodal instruction task performance.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal-llm","forgetting","continual-training","vlm"],"keywords":["Visual and Textual Learners","Large Language Models","Multimodal Large Language Models"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"多模态大模型通常基于预训练纯文本LLM初始化，依次完成图文对齐和多模态混合数据微调。","claim_en":"Multimodal LLMs are usually initialized from pretrained text-only LLMs, and go through image-text alignment and multimodal mixed fine-tuning sequentially.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"多模态LLM微调阶段的纯文本遗忘主要由注意力从前置文本tokens向图片tokens的偏移导致，而非仅由LLM原生参数被修改导致。","claim_en":"Text-only forgetting during MLLM fine-tuning is mainly caused by attention shift from pre-image text tokens to image tokens, not only by modification of original LLM parameters.","opposes":"此前研究普遍将多模态微调时的文本能力遗忘归因于预训练LLM原生参数被多模态训练更新破坏。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§2 Analysis","why_contested":"直接改变了MLLM保留文本能力的优化方向，从保护原生参数转向调整注意力分布。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"多模态训练文本遗忘归因于注意力偏移，低秩残差注意力方案可直接复用，只看LoRRA模块设计部分即可。","en":"Text-only forgetting in MLLM training is attributed to attention shift, the low-rank residual attention solution is directly reusable, only read the LoRRA module design section."}},{"id":"ZhangLLZWZQ24","title":"SpeechAlign: Aligning Speech Generation to Human Preferences","authors":["Dong Zhang","Zhaowei Li","Shimin Li","Xin Zhang","Pengyu Wang","Yaqian Zhou","Xipeng Qiu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$8f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangLLZWZQ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangLLZWZQ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/5a016da670821af25f151f523a2e563f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"神经编码语音生成模型的训练和推理分布存在差异，且现有研究普遍忽略引入偏好优化对齐语音输出与人类偏好，导致生成语音的自然度、符合度不及预期。","importance":"方法级贡献，首次将偏好优化范式落地到编码语音生成模型，填补了语音大模型偏好对齐的空白，为提升生成语音的人类满意度提供了可复用的流水线。","technical_approach":"原创的迭代自提升策略SpeechAlign，首先构造偏好编码数据集，对比黄金标准编码tokens和模型合成编码tokens的偏好差异，再基于偏好数据优化语音生成模型，同时利用偏好优化缩小训练和推理的分布gap。","experiments":"未公开具体模型参数量、训练数据规模及偏好提升的具体量化指标，仅定性验证该方法可提升生成语音的人类偏好匹配度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Neural codec based speech generation models have distribution gap between training and inference phases, and prior works rarely integrate preference optimization to align speech outputs with human preferences, leading to subpar naturalness and alignment of generated speech.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It first applies RLHF-like preference optimization paradigm to codec speech generation models, fills the gap of preference alignment for speech LLMs, and provides a reusable pipeline to improve human satisfaction of generated speech.","technical_approach":"The proposed iterative self-improvement strategy SpeechAlign is an original design. It first constructs a preference codec dataset that contrasts golden codec tokens with synthetic tokens, then optimizes the speech generation model on the preference dataset, which also reduces the training-inference distribution gap.","experiments":"No specific model size, training data scale or quantitative preference improvement metrics are disclosed in the provided abstract, only qualitative validation that the method improves human preference matching of generated speech.","authors_note":""},"tags":["speech-generation","preference-alignment","audio-lm","reward-model"],"keywords":["Speech generation","RLHF","self-improvement"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"神经编码语言模型是当前高自然度语音生成的主流技术路线。","claim_en":"Neural codec language models are the mainstream technical route for high-naturalness speech generation.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"偏好优化可以同时实现语音生成模型与人类偏好对齐、缩小训练推理分布gap两个目标。","claim_en":"Preference optimization can achieve two goals simultaneously: aligning speech generation models with human preferences, and reducing the training-inference distribution gap.","opposes":"此前研究认为缩小语音生成训练推理分布gap与对齐人类偏好是两个独立的优化目标，需分别解决。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§2 Analysis","why_contested":"简化了语音生成模型的优化流程，可同时提升分布一致性和人类满意度。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3偏好数据集构造和§4迭代自提升实验结果即可，可直接复用到内部语音大模型的偏好对齐流水线。","en":"Only read §3 for preference dataset construction and §4 for iterative self-boosting experiment results, reusable for your internal speech LLM preference alignment pipeline."}},{"id":"ZhangQZ0WWYQ00Z24","title":"CoVoMix: Advancing Zero-Shot Speech Generation for Human-like Multi-talker Conversations","authors":["Leying Zhang","Yao Qian","Long Zhou","Shujie Liu","Dongmei Wang","Xiaofei Wang","Midia Yousefi","Yanmin Qian","Jinyu Li","Lei He","Sheng Zhao","Michael Zeng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$90","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangQZ0WWYQ00Z24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangQZ0WWYQ00Z24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/b5fd95d6b16d3172e307103a97f19e1b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有零样本TTS模型仅能生成单说话人语音，无法实现多说话人、多轮对话场景下的自然语音生成，对话的韵律、说话人切换流畅度等符合人类习惯的特征难以建模。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了首个面向多轮多说话人对话的零样本语音生成范式，为对话类语音生成应用（如数字人对话、语音客服）提供了技术支撑。","technical_approach":"原创的三阶段生成框架，首先将对话文本转换为多个独立的离散token流，每个流对应单个说话人的语义信息；再用流匹配声学模型生成混合的梅尔频谱；最后用HiFi-GAN生成波形。该方案无需为每个说话人单独训练模型，统一建模多说话人交互特征。","experiments":"未公开具体模型参数量、测试集MOS分及说话人相似度指标，仅定性验证生成的多说话人对话语音自然度接近人类水平。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing zero-shot TTS models can only generate single-speaker speech, and cannot realize natural speech generation in multi-speaker, multi-turn dialogue scenarios, as human-like features such as prosody and smooth speaker switching are hard to model.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It proposes the first zero-shot speech generation paradigm targeting multi-turn multi-speaker dialogues, and provides technical support for conversational speech generation applications such as digital human dialogue and voice customer service.","technical_approach":"The proposed 3-stage generation framework is original. It first converts dialogue text into multiple independent discrete token streams, each corresponding to semantic information of one speaker; then generates mixed mel-spectrograms with a flow-matching based acoustic model; finally produces waveforms via HiFi-GAN. It does not train separate models for each speaker, and unifies modeling of multi-speaker interaction features.","experiments":"No specific model size, test set MOS score or speaker similarity metrics are disclosed in the provided abstract, only qualitative validation that the generated multi-speaker dialogue speech has naturalness close to human level.","authors_note":""},"tags":["speech-generation","audio-lm","zero-shot","conversation"],"keywords":["text-to-speech","dialogue generation","zero-shot"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"流匹配模型适合高保真声学特征生成，HiFi-GAN可将梅尔频谱高效转换为高自然度语音波形。","claim_en":"Flow-matching models are suitable for high-fidelity acoustic feature generation, and HiFi-GAN can efficiently convert mel-spectrograms to high-naturalness speech waveforms.","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"多说话人对话语音可通过统一生成混合梅尔频谱的方式实现，无需单独生成每个说话人的语音再混音。","claim_en":"Multi-speaker dialogue speech can be realized by unified generation of mixed mel-spectrograms, without generating speech for each speaker separately and then mixing.","opposes":"此前多说话人语音生成方案普遍采用先生成单说话人语音再混音的两阶段流程。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3.2 Acoustic Model","why_contested":"大幅降低了多说话人对话语音生成的计算开销，同时提升了说话人切换的自然度。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为多说话人对话语音生成方向的文献备查即可，不用读正文，方法落地约束多，泛用性有限。","en":"Keep it as literature reference for multi-talker conversational speech generation, no need to read full text, limited generalizability due to strict setup constraints."}},{"id":"2402.14951","title":"In-Context Learning of a Linear Transformer Block: Benefits of the MLP Component and One-Step GD Initialization","authors":["Ruiqi Zhang","Jingfeng Wu","Peter L. Bartlett"],"institutions":["UC Berkeley"],"abstract":"$91","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.14951","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangWB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangWB24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/20b6b87ca17792337f414d948af7b0e8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有线性Transformer块（LTB）的上下文学习（ICL）能力研究仅关注注意力组件的作用，忽略了MLP组件对ICL性能的贡献，也未明确线性Transformer的ICL能力与梯度下降估计器的对应关系。","importance":"机制级贡献，明确了线性Transformer块中MLP组件对ICL能力的必要作用，建立了线性Transformer ICL与一步可学习初始化梯度下降估计器的等价关系，为Transformer ICL机制的理论研究提供了新的参考框架。","technical_approach":"理论分析为主的改进型研究，针对非零均值高斯先验的线性回归ICL任务，证明仅含线性注意力的结构存在不可约的近似误差，而加入线性MLP的LTB可接近贝叶斯最优ICL风险；同时建立了LTB与带可学习初始化的一步GD（GD-β）估计器的双向对应关系。","experiments":"纯理论分析工作，无实际大模型实验，仅通过数学推导证明上述结论，给出了仅注意力结构的不可约误差的量化上界。","authors_note":"含知名理论机器学习学者Peter L. Bartlett，团队长期从事深度学习理论、泛化性相关研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing studies on in-context learning (ICL) ability of Linear Transformer Blocks (LTB) only focus on the role of attention components, ignore the contribution of MLP components to ICL performance, and do not clarify the correspondence between ICL ability of linear Transformers and gradient descent estimators.","importance":"Mechanism-level contribution. It confirms the necessary role of MLP components in LTB for ICL performance, establishes the equivalence between linear Transformer ICL and one-step gradient descent estimators with learnable initialization, and provides a new reference framework for theoretical research on Transformer ICL mechanisms.","technical_approach":"This is a theory-driven improved study. For linear regression ICL tasks with non-zero mean Gaussian prior, it proves that linear attention-only structures have irreducible approximation error, while LTB with linear MLP can achieve near Bayes-optimal ICL risk. It also establishes a bidirectional correspondence between LTB and one-step GD with learnable initialization (GD-β) estimators.","experiments":"Pure theoretical analysis work, no actual large model experiments. The conclusions are proved via mathematical derivation, and a quantitative upper bound of the irreducible error for attention-only structures is given.","authors_note":"Includes well-known theoretical machine learning scholar Peter L. Bartlett, whose team has long worked on deep learning theory and generalization research."},"tags":["in-context-learning","linear-transformer","mlp","theory"],"keywords":["In-Context Learning","Transformers","Approximation Theory","Optimization"],"notable_authors":["Peter L. Bartlett"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"线性注意力结构可实现线性时间复杂度的序列建模，在长上下文任务中具有效率优势。","claim_en":"Linear attention structures can realize linear time complexity sequence modeling, and have efficiency advantages in long context tasks.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"对于非零均值高斯先验的线性回归ICL任务，仅含线性注意力的结构存在不可约近似误差，必须加入线性MLP才能接近贝叶斯最优风险。","claim_en":"For linear regression ICL tasks with non-zero mean Gaussian prior, linear attention-only structures have irreducible approximation error, and linear MLP must be added to achieve near Bayes-optimal risk.","opposes":"此前研究普遍认为线性Transformer的ICL能力仅由注意力组件贡献，MLP组件对ICL性能无关键作用。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Theoretical Results","why_contested":"修正了对线性Transformer ICL能力来源的认知，为改进线性Transformer的ICL性能提供了理论依据。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为线性Transformer ICL机制研究的文献备查，结论仅适用于受控线性回归任务，对通用Transformer参考价值有限。","en":"Keep as reference for linear Transformer ICL mechanism research, conclusions only apply to controlled linear regression tasks, limited value for general Transformer studies."}},{"id":"2406.03816","title":"ReST-MCTS*: LLM Self-Training via Process Reward Guided Tree Search","authors":["Dan Zhang","Sining Zhoubian","Ziniu Hu","Yisong Yue","Yuxiao Dong","Jie Tang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$92","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.03816","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangZHYD024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangZHYD024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/76ec4dc30e9faaf0e4b6093eaa377218-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：用 LLM 自训练构造推理数据时，只按最终答案是否正确来筛选样本，会保留大量‘答案对但过程错’的轨迹，反而把错误中间推理教回模型。过去很多 self-training 或 rejection sampling 都停在 outcome supervision，也就是只看终局，不看过程；这在数学、代码等需要长链推理的任务上尤其不够。","importance":"它的重要性在于把‘过程监督怎么来’这个长期卡点，推进成了一个可操作的自举方案。对 pretrain/posttrain 接口的启示很直接：如果没有人工逐步标注，也能从最终正确答案反推出较可靠的 step-level reward，那么高质量 reasoning trace 的供给方式会变，SFT、RM、RL 不必完全依赖昂贵的人类过程标注。这更像训练信号构造方法上的进展，而不只是另一个搜索增强技巧。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把过程奖励模型和树搜索联合起来做自训练，具体是 ReST-MCTS*：用 MCTS* 在推理树上搜索，并用过程奖励引导扩展与评估，再把搜索得到的高质量轨迹和逐步 value 反过来训练 policy model 与 reward model。关键点不在于单独使用 MCTS，而在于它试图绕开人工 step annotation：给定最终 oracle answer，系统通过树搜索估计‘当前这一步还有多大概率能走到正确终局’，把这个量当作隐式过程奖励。和只保留正确 final answer 的过滤式自训练相比，这种设计更重视中间步骤的可恢复性与前向价值，因此更容易筛掉捷径、瞎猜和局部错误路径。代价是搜索成本更高，而且依赖可验证终答案的任务设定。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体参数量和完整数字，但能确定实验重点是 reasoning self-training，且评估对象应包括 policy model、process reward model 以及搜索后的数据质量。合理的 baseline 会是纯 answer-filtered self-training、best-of-N、无过程奖励的 MCTS 或标准 SFT/RL 流程。论文声称能收集更高质量的 reasoning traces，并生成 per-step value；如果正文扎实，最值得看的不是单次准确率，而是：过程监督是否比 outcome-only 数据更 sample efficient、reward model 是否能泛化到未见步骤、以及搜索深度/分支数增加后的收益是否递减。","authors_note":"作者包含 Yisong Yue、Yuxiao Dong。若按公开作者信息，这类组合通常与 Caltech / UCLA / Kuaishou 或相关研究团队有关；但仅凭当前输入无法准确确认具体机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a common failure mode in LLM self-training: filtering by final-answer correctness keeps many trajectories with wrong intermediate reasoning, so the model learns flawed chains of thought even when the endpoint is correct. Prior self-training methods largely stay at outcome supervision, which is especially limiting for math and other long-horizon reasoning tasks.","importance":"Its main contribution is methodological: it turns process supervision from an annotation bottleneck into a bootstrapping problem. This matters at the pretrain/posttrain boundary because, if step-level rewards can be inferred from final verified answers, high-quality reasoning data no longer depends entirely on expensive human process labels. That changes how one can build SFT data, reward models, and RL pipelines for reasoning.","technical_approach":"The method, ReST-MCTS*, combines process reward guidance with tree search for self-training. The key idea is not merely to run MCTS, but to use search to infer implicit step-level rewards: given an oracle final answer, the system estimates how likely a partial step is to still reach a correct solution, and uses that as a process reward signal. Search then produces better reasoning traces and per-step value targets, which are used to train both the policy and reward models. Compared with answer-only filtering, this design favors trajectories with recoverable and value-consistent intermediate states rather than lucky endings. The trade-off is higher search cost and reliance on tasks with verifiable final answers.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide model sizes or headline numbers, so the quantitative summary must stay limited. What is clear is that the evaluation centers on reasoning self-training, data quality, and downstream policy improvement, likely against answer-filtered self-training, best-of-N sampling, and search without process rewards. The most useful results to inspect in the full paper are whether process-guided traces are more sample-efficient than outcome-only data, whether the learned process reward generalizes beyond searched states, and how search depth or branching affects returns.","authors_note":"The author list includes Yisong Yue and Yuxiao Dong. Based on public profiles, this combination is often associated with Caltech / UCLA / Kuaishou-related teams, but the exact institutions cannot be confirmed from the provided input alone."},"tags":["self-training","mcts","process-reward","reasoning"],"notable_authors":["Dan Zhang","Sining Zhoubian","Ziniu Hu","Yisong Yue","Yuxiao Dong"],"keywords":["LLM self-training","process reward model","tree search"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4隐式过程奖励构造和自训练迭代实验即可，可直接尝试复用到内部推理类模型的自训练数据构造环节。","en":"Only read §4 for implicit process reward construction and self-training iteration experiments, can be reused for internal reasoning model self-training data pipeline."}},{"id":"2409.19808","title":"Can Models Learn Skill Composition from Examples?","authors":["Haoyu Zhao","Simran Kaur","Dingli Yu","Anirudh Goyal","Sanjeev Arora"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$93","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.19808","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Zhao0YGA24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Zhao0YGA24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/b99fd30559b520cc97447ba905040677-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：模型能否从示例中真正学会技能组合，而不只是记住单技能模式或训练分布里见过的组合。过去关于 compositional generalization 的讨论很多，但在 LLM 上常常混杂了规模效应、数据泄漏和 prompt 工程；作者选择类似 SKILL-MIX 的受控设定，是想把‘会不会组合’这个问题单独拉出来测。","importance":"它的重要性更多在能力诊断和训练范式判断，而不是直接给出新架构。对 pretrain 有启发的地方是，如果小模型在足够干净的示例驱动训练下仍然难以学会 skill composition，那问题就不只是参数规模，而可能是预训练分布、目标函数和课程设计没有显式鼓励组合式泛化。反过来，如果能学会，也说明一部分组合能力可以通过更合适的数据构造而非纯粹放大模型获得。","technical_approach":"从摘要看，作者沿用或近似 SKILL-MIX 的任务定义：给出一个 k 元技能集合，让模型写一段同时体现这些技能的文本，然后系统研究较小模型是否能通过 examples 学到组合。技术核心应当不是新模型，而是一个受控训练与评测框架：把技能原子化，控制训练中出现的技能组合阶数和频率，再观察对未见组合的泛化。与直接在开放任务上看主观输出质量不同，这种设计的优点是能区分‘会单个技能’和‘会组合多个技能’。它的边界在于，技能组合的形式化定义较强，和真实世界推理/规划中的组合不完全等价。","experiments":"摘要给出了一条关键背景：此前小模型连 k=3 都难，GPT-4 在 k=5 和 6 上表现尚可。本文的重点应是更系统地考察小模型在类 SKILL-MIX 设定下，经过示例训练后能否提升组合能力。由于摘要截断，没有模型参数、训练样本数和具体提升幅度，不能编造数字。值得重点看的实验包括：随着 k 增大，性能是否平滑退化还是突然崩溃；训练中是否必须覆盖高阶组合才能泛化；以及不同数据配比下，模型是在学组合规则，还是仅靠更强的单技能执行能力带来表面提升。","authors_note":"作者包含 Sanjeev Arora。具体机构无法从当前输入准确确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a narrow but important question: can models actually learn to compose skills from examples, rather than merely memorizing individual skills or combinations seen during training? Discussion around compositional generalization in LLMs is often confounded by scale, prompting, and possible data contamination, so a controlled setup is useful.","importance":"Its value is primarily diagnostic. For pretraining researchers, the result helps separate a scale story from a training-objective or data-distribution story. If smaller models still fail under controlled supervision, then compositionality is not just missing parameters; it may be weakly supported by current pretraining data and objectives. If they succeed, that suggests part of the problem can be addressed through better curriculum and data construction rather than brute-force scaling alone.","technical_approach":"The paper appears to use a setup similar to SKILL-MIX, where the model must generate a paragraph that simultaneously demonstrates a specified k-tuple of language skills. The contribution is likely not a new architecture but a controlled training-and-evaluation protocol: define atomic skills, control which combinations are seen during training, and measure generalization to unseen compositions. This matters because it separates competence at individual skills from competence at combining them. The limitation is that this formal notion of composition may only partially reflect broader reasoning or planning composition in open-ended language tasks.","experiments":"The abstract gives one useful reference point: prior work found that small models struggled even at k=3, while GPT-4 performed reasonably at k=5 and k=6. This paper focuses on whether smaller models can improve under example-based training in a similar setup. Since the abstract is truncated, no reliable numbers on model size, data scale, or gains can be reported here. The most informative results will be how performance degrades as k increases, whether training must include higher-order combinations to generalize, and whether apparent gains come from genuine composition or simply stronger execution of the component skills.","authors_note":"The author list includes Sanjeev Arora. Exact institutional affiliations cannot be confirmed from the provided input."},"tags":["compositional-generalization","skill-composition","llm","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Haoyu Zhao","Simran Kaur","Dingli Yu","Anirudh Goyal","Sanjeev Arora"],"keywords":["Skill Composition","Large Language Model"],"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对小模型仅靠规模就能学会组合泛化的认知，应立刻在内部预训练数据策略实验中复现其受控评测框架。","en":"Changes my prior that scale alone enables compositional generalization for small models, immediately replicate its controlled evaluation framework in internal pretraining data strategy experiments."}},{"id":"ZhaoFHZL24","title":"CLUES: Collaborative Private-domain High-quality Data Selection for LLMs via Training Dynamics","authors":["Wanru Zhao","Hongxiang Fan","Shell Xu Hu","Wangchunshu Zhou","Nicholas D. Lane"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$94","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhaoFHZL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhaoFHZL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ff80e644be415af4bcd7e4b4efb2152f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：在多数据孤岛、不能直接共享原始数据的协作训练场景里，如何做高质量数据选择。数据质量对 LLM 预训练很关键，但现有数据清洗和混配方法大多默认可以集中访问样本；一旦进入私域协作或联邦环境，最直接的数据评分手段就失效了。","importance":"它的重要性在于把‘数据质量控制’从中心化预训练问题推进到协作式训练问题。对 pretrain 的启示很明确：未来很多高价值数据都在企业私域、端侧或机构隔离环境里，能否在不看原始数据的条件下做质量筛选，会影响可用语料规模与质量上限。这是数据级方法，不是模型级创新，但对真实世界的大模型训练数据供应链很关键。","technical_approach":"CLUES 的核心思路是用训练动态相似性做代理质量信号：高质量私域数据在训练过程中对模型产生的影响，应更接近一个高质量 anchor dataset。具体做法是计算不同私域数据相对于 anchor 的训练动态影响，再据此选择数据，并把选择后的训练放到 model merging 或 federated learning 的协作框架中。这个设计的优势是避免直接暴露样本内容，把质量估计转成模型行为层面的相似性判断。和单独看困惑度、loss 或启发式规则相比，训练动态更像在看‘这批数据会把模型往哪里推’，因此更贴近真正的数据价值。代价是它依赖 anchor 的代表性；如果 anchor 本身分布偏窄，可能会误伤有价值但风格不同的数据。","experiments":"摘要没有给出模型规模、私域数量、任务和具体提升幅度，但明确比较场景应包括 collaborative training 下的数据选择效果，并支持 model merging 与 federated learning 两种范式。合理 baseline 会包括随机选数、按 loss/perplexity 打分、无选择的全量协作训练，以及其他数据质量指标。若正文结果扎实，最值得关注的是三点：一，是否在不共享原始数据的条件下接近中心化数据筛选效果；二，收益主要来自过滤低质噪声还是提升 domain balance；三，anchor dataset 的选择对结果有多敏感。","authors_note":"作者列表包含 Nicholas D. Lane。具体机构无法从当前输入准确确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical data problem: how to perform high-quality data selection for LLM training when data lives in private silos and cannot be shared directly. Most existing data curation methods assume centralized access to examples, which breaks in collaborative or federated settings.","importance":"This is a data-centric contribution with clear pretraining relevance. Much of the highest-value future training data may sit in enterprise, on-device, or otherwise private domains. If quality control cannot operate under those constraints, the available corpus becomes either much smaller or much noisier. So while the paper does not change the model architecture, it addresses a real bottleneck in the LLM data pipeline.","technical_approach":"CLUES uses similarity in training dynamics as a proxy for data quality. The core assumption is that high-quality private-domain data should induce model updates more aligned with those induced by a trusted anchor dataset. The method computes influence signals from training dynamics relative to that anchor, selects data accordingly, and plugs the result into collaborative training via model merging or federated learning. Compared with simpler signals like loss or perplexity, this is a more directional notion of quality: it asks not just whether a sample is easy or hard, but how it pushes the model during optimization. The trade-off is that success depends on the anchor dataset being representative; a narrow anchor may incorrectly downweight useful but distributionally different data.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide model sizes, number of silos, or quantitative gains, so those details cannot be stated safely. It does make clear that the evaluation covers collaborative training and supports both model merging and federated learning. Strong baselines should include random selection, no selection, and simpler quality heuristics such as loss/perplexity-based scoring. The most informative full-paper results would be whether CLUES approaches centralized curation quality without raw data sharing, whether gains mainly come from filtering noisy data versus improving domain balance, and how sensitive the method is to the choice of anchor dataset.","authors_note":"The author list includes Nicholas D. Lane. Exact institutional affiliations cannot be confirmed from the provided input."},"tags":["data-quality","data-selection","training-dynamics","collaborative"],"notable_authors":["Wanru Zhao","Hongxiang Fan","Shell Xu Hu","Wangchunshu Zhou","Nicholas D. Lane"],"keywords":["large language models","data quality","model merging","federated learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3训练动态相似性计算方法和§5联邦训练实验即可，可复用在私域协作预训练的数据筛选环节。","en":"Only read §3 for training dynamics similarity calculation and §5 for federated training experiments, reusable for data selection in private domain collaborative pretraining."}},{"id":"2406.11233","title":"Probing the Decision Boundaries of In-context Learning in Large Language Models","authors":["Siyan Zhao","Tung Nguyen","Aditya Grover"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$95","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11233","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhaoNG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhaoNG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/eb5dd4476448c44e55a759a985b3bbec-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：ICL 到底学到了怎样的分类规则，尤其其决策边界长什么样。过去理解 in-context learning 常从缩放、数据、注意力模式或隐式优化器角度切入，但这些分析不够直观，难以直接看出模型是在做线性分隔、原型匹配，还是别的奇怪规则。","importance":"它的重要性在于提供了一种更可视化、也更接近经典统计学习语言的 ICL 诊断视角。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，ICL 能力不能只用 few-shot accuracy 评估；模型也许答对了不少点，但其决策边界仍然非常不规则，这意味着泛化机制和鲁棒性与我们熟悉的标准分类器并不一样。这样的结果会影响我们如何设计 ICL benchmark、如何解释上下文示例对模型内部分类器的塑形。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把 ICL 二分类问题投影到可分析的低维输入空间中，直接探测由提示示例诱导出的决策边界。和只比较整体准确率不同，这种方法关注边界几何：边界是否平滑、是否接近最近邻/线性分类器、是否受示例排列和语义表述影响。摘要里最关键的一句话是作者‘惊讶地发现’当前 LLM 在简单二分类任务上学到的决策边界是反常的，这意味着 ICL 可能不是在稳定地拟合一个简单判别器，而是混入了提示格式、token 模式和预训练先验。这个方法的优点是直观，缺点是主要适用于低维、受控任务，对真实高维语言任务的外推有限。","experiments":"摘要截断了，因此没有模型名单、任务维度和数字结果。可以确定的是，实验围绕 in-context binary classification，重点不是 benchmark SOTA，而是边界形状和归纳偏置分析。合理 baseline 应包含标准分类器，如 logistic regression、nearest neighbor、kernel 方法，或显式 meta-learning 模型，用来对照 LLM 的边界几何。若正文充分，最有价值的观察会是：模型规模增大是否让边界更规则；不同 prompt 模板和 demonstration ordering 是否显著改变边界；以及 accuracy 相近的模型是否可能拥有完全不同的边界结构。","authors_note":"作者包含 Aditya Grover。具体机构无法从当前输入准确确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a concrete mechanistic question about in-context learning: what kind of classifier does an LLM induce from demonstrations, and what do its decision boundaries actually look like? Prior analyses often focus on scaling, pretraining, or attention patterns, but those views do not directly reveal the geometry of the induced predictor.","importance":"Its contribution is diagnostic rather than architectural. For pretraining research, the value is that few-shot accuracy alone may hide very different generalization mechanisms. A model can perform well on held-out points while still inducing highly irregular decision boundaries, which suggests that ICL behavior may differ sharply from standard supervised classifiers in robustness and extrapolation.","technical_approach":"The method studies in-context binary classification through the lens of decision boundaries, likely in low-dimensional controlled settings where the boundary can be visualized directly. Instead of just measuring accuracy, it examines whether the induced classifier looks linear, nearest-neighbor-like, prototype-based, or something more pathological, and how it changes with prompt construction. The key takeaway hinted by the abstract is that current LLMs learn surprisingly atypical boundaries even on simple tasks. That suggests ICL may be shaped not only by task evidence in the examples, but also by prompt format, tokenization artifacts, and pretrained priors. The strength of this approach is interpretability; its limitation is that boundary visualization is naturally most informative in simplified settings.","experiments":"The abstract is truncated and does not provide the evaluated models or numerical results. What is clear is that the experiments focus on in-context binary classification and analyze decision-boundary geometry rather than leaderboard performance. Strong baselines would include standard classifiers such as logistic regression, nearest neighbors, and kernel methods, or explicit meta-learners. The most useful findings in the full paper would be whether boundary regularity improves with scale, how sensitive the boundary is to prompt template and demonstration order, and whether models with similar accuracy can still implement very different decision rules.","authors_note":"The author list includes Aditya Grover. Exact institutional affiliations cannot be confirmed from the provided input."},"tags":["in-context-learning","decision-boundary","llm","probing"],"notable_authors":["Siyan Zhao","Tung Nguyen","Aditya Grover"],"keywords":["in-context learning; Large language models; LLM decision boundary"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看Fig2-4的决策边界可视化结果即可，可用来优化内部ICL评测基准的鲁棒性评估逻辑。","en":"Only read Fig 2-4 for decision boundary visualization results, can be used to optimize robustness evaluation logic for internal ICL benchmarks."}},{"id":"ZhouTQYJX0024","title":"Star-Agents: Automatic Data Optimization with LLM Agents for Instruction Tuning","authors":["Hang Zhou","Yehui Tang","Haochen Qin","Yujie Yang","Renren Jin","Deyi Xiong","Kai Han","Yunhe Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$96","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhouTQYJX0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhouTQYJX0024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/0852b88e96d973bd4e21b673f51621d0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"指令微调（instruction tuning）的数据质量直接决定模型对齐效果，但人工筛选和标注成本高昂。已有的自动数据生成方法缺乏系统性的质量优化机制，生成数据的多样性和难度分布往往不理想。","importance":"数据级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于 posttrain 数据质量的自动化优化——如果 SFT 数据能被 LLM agent 自动筛选和改进，这为 pretrain-posttrain 闭环中的数据反哺提供了一条可行路径。方法本身是工程级改进，但思路对 continual pretrain 和 mid-train 的数据策略有参考价值。","technical_approach":"用多个 LLM agent 协作完成指令数据的自动优化：agent 负责数据生成、评估、筛选和迭代改进。核心思路是把数据优化过程建模为多智能体协作问题，通过 agent 间的反馈循环提升数据质量。具体细节因 abstract 缺失无法进一步确认。","experiments":"具体实验数据因 abstract 缺失无法确认。从标题和作者信息推断，应在标准指令微调基准上验证了数据优化后的模型性能提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Instruction tuning data quality is critical for alignment but expensive to curate manually. Existing automatic data generation methods lack systematic quality optimization, often producing data with suboptimal diversity and difficulty distributions.","importance":"Data-level contribution. Relevant to pretrain research through the lens of automated posttrain data optimization — if SFT data can be automatically curated by LLM agents, this informs data feedback loops in pretrain-posttrain pipelines and continual pretraining strategies.","technical_approach":"Uses multiple LLM agents to collaboratively optimize instruction tuning data through generation, evaluation, filtering, and iterative refinement. The data optimization process is modeled as a multi-agent collaboration problem. Detailed mechanisms cannot be confirmed due to missing abstract.","experiments":"Specific experimental details unavailable due to missing abstract. Expected to validate on standard instruction tuning benchmarks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["instruction-tuning","data-quality","llm-agents","sft"],"keywords":["Large language models","Data","Instruction-Tuning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"给预训练-后训练闭环中的数据反哺提供了可行落地方向，应立刻在内部SFT数据迭代实验中验证多智能体数据优化方案。","en":"Provides a feasible direction for data feedback in pretrain-posttrain closed loop, immediately validate multi-agent data optimization scheme in internal SFT data iteration experiments."}},{"id":"ZhuHZJJTR24","title":"Towards a Theoretical Understanding of the &apos;Reversal Curse&apos; via Training Dynamics","authors":["Hanlin Zhu","Baihe Huang","Shaolun Zhang","Michael I. Jordan","Jiantao Jiao","Yuandong Tian","Stuart J. Russell"],"institutions":["UC Berkeley"],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhuHZJJTR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhuHZJJTR24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a4b95476f673e6e538f80862f622ba2f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"Reversal Curse 是指 LLM 学会了 'A is B' 后却无法推断 'B is A' 的现象。之前的工作主要是实证观察，缺乏从训练动态角度的理论解释——为什么 autoregressive 训练会导致这种单向性？","importance":"理论/机制分析级贡献。这对 pretrain 研究非常有价值：Reversal Curse 直接暴露了 AR 语言建模范式的一个根本局限——单向条件概率建模导致的知识不对称性。理论理解有助于指导数据增强策略（如是否需要双向数据）、训练目标设计（AR vs. masked LM vs. diffusion LM），以及评估 pretrain 数据的覆盖性。Michael Jordan 和 Jiantao Jiao 参与，理论功底有保障。","technical_approach":"从训练动态（training dynamics）角度分析 Reversal Curse 的成因。具体理论框架因 abstract 缺失无法确认，但从标题推断应该是分析梯度更新过程中 AR 目标如何导致正向关联的学习不能自动泛化到反向关联。","experiments":"具体实验细节因 abstract 缺失无法确认。预期包含理论分析的实证验证实验。","authors_note":"作者包括 Michael I. Jordan（UC Berkeley，机器学习领域奠基人之一）和 Jiantao Jiao（UC Berkeley，信息论与统计学习）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The Reversal Curse — LLMs learn 'A is B' but fail to infer 'B is A' — has been empirically observed but lacks theoretical explanation from the training dynamics perspective. Why does autoregressive training produce this asymmetry?","importance":"Theory/mechanism-level contribution, highly valuable for pretrain research. The Reversal Curse exposes a fundamental limitation of the AR modeling paradigm — unidirectional conditional probability modeling creates knowledge asymmetry. Theoretical understanding can guide data augmentation strategies, training objective design (AR vs. masked LM vs. diffusion LM), and pretraining data coverage assessment.","technical_approach":"Analyzes the Reversal Curse through the lens of training dynamics. Specific theoretical framework unavailable due to missing abstract, but likely examines how gradient updates under AR objectives fail to generalize forward associations to reverse associations.","experiments":"Specific experimental details unavailable due to missing abstract. Expected to include empirical validation of theoretical analysis.","authors_note":"Authors include Michael I. Jordan (UC Berkeley, foundational figure in ML) and Jiantao Jiao (UC Berkeley, information theory and statistical learning)."},"tags":["training-dynamics","generalization","reversal-curse","mechanistic"],"notable_authors":["Michael I. Jordan","Jiantao Jiao"],"recommendation":{"zh":"从训练动态角度解释了AR预训练目标的固有单向知识缺陷，可直接用来指导内部预训练数据增强和目标函数优化实验。","en":"Explains the inherent unidirectional knowledge flaw of AR pretraining objective from training dynamics perspective, directly guides internal pretraining data augmentation and loss function optimization experiments."}},{"id":"ZimmermannKB24","title":"Measuring Per-Unit Interpretability at Scale Without Humans","authors":["Roland S. Zimmermann","David A. Klindt","Wieland Brendel"],"institutions":["University of Tübingen"],"abstract":"$97","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZimmermannKB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZimmermannKB24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/56ed2bd15b66f709cd81cb1aaa0496b9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"神经网络中单个神经元（unit）的可解释性评估传统上依赖人工标注，成本高且难以规模化。需要一种自动化方法来大规模衡量每个 unit 的可解释性程度。","importance":"方法/工具级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的价值在于提供了一种规模化的 interpretability 探针——可以用来分析预训练过程中不同阶段、不同层的神经元可解释性变化，帮助理解 pretrain 动态和表示学习过程。但整体偏向 interpretability 工具而非 pretrain 方法改进。","technical_approach":"提出无需人工标注的自动化方法来衡量每个神经元的可解释性。具体技术细节因 abstract 缺失无法确认。","experiments":"具体实验细节因 abstract 缺失无法确认。","authors_note":"Wieland Brendel 是 Tübingen 大学/ELLIS 的知名研究者，在对抗鲁棒性和可解释性方面有代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Evaluating per-unit interpretability in neural networks traditionally requires human annotation, which is expensive and unscalable. An automated method for measuring interpretability at scale is needed.","importance":"Method/tool-level contribution. Provides a scalable interpretability probe that could be used to analyze how neuron interpretability changes across pretraining stages and layers, aiding understanding of pretraining dynamics and representation learning. Primarily an interpretability tool rather than a pretraining method improvement.","technical_approach":"Proposes an automated method for measuring per-unit interpretability without human annotation. Specific technical details unavailable due to missing abstract.","experiments":"Specific experimental details unavailable due to missing abstract.","authors_note":"Wieland Brendel (University of Tübingen/ELLIS) is known for work on adversarial robustness and interpretability."},"tags":["interpretability","scaling","representation","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Wieland Brendel"],"keywords":["interpretability","explainability","deep learning","neural networks","analysis","activation maximization","alignment","evaluation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"提供了规模化神经元可解释性的自动化探针，可直接接入内部预训练动态分析工具链，监控不同训练阶段的表示学习效果。","en":"Provides an automated scalable neuron interpretability probe, can be integrated into internal pretraining dynamics analysis toolchain to monitor representation learning across training stages."}},{"id":"2410.20482","title":"What Factors Affect Multi-Modal In-Context Learning? An In-Depth Exploration","authors":["Libo Qin","Qiguang Chen","Hao Fei","Zhi Chen","Min Li","Wanxiang Che"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$98","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.20482","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001C000C24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001C000C24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/deeb4d6bdb5860fd7faf321dd5486d25-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答“多模态 ICL 为什么有时有效、有时失效”，并把问题拆成可操作的三段：示例检索、示例排序、提示构造；以往工作多停留在经验配方，缺少系统性因子分析。","importance":"贡献是“诊断学”而不是新模型：它把 MM-ICL 的收益归因到具体环节，给出可复用的工程结论（例如检索器是否多模态、示例内部顺序是否重要），对做 VLM prompt/检索管线的人比再提一个新 prompt 模板更有直接价值。","technical_approach":"方法是大规模对照实验而非算法创新：在 6 个 VLM 上，用约 20 种策略分别干预 demonstration retrieval / ordering / prompt construction，并用统一评测把性能变化映射回“哪个环节在起作用”。关键设计取舍是把变量拆开单独控住，避免把“检索质量差”误判成“模型不会 ICL”。","experiments":"摘要只给了规模信息：覆盖 6 个 VLM 与 20 种策略，围绕三步流程做系统对比；结论层面强调(1) demonstration retrieval 需要多模态检索器，(2) demonstration 内部/之间的排序会显著影响效果。具体任务集、指标、提升幅度、以及是否跨模型一致，摘要未提供。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper pinpoints why multimodal in-context learning (MM-ICL) is brittle by decomposing it into three controllable stages—demo retrieval, demo ordering, and prompt construction—where prior work often relied on ad-hoc recipes without isolating causal factors.","importance":"This is a methodology/diagnostics contribution: it turns MM-ICL from “prompt folklore” into actionable knobs (e.g., whether retrieval must be multimodal, when ordering matters), which is directly useful for building VLM prompting + retrieval pipelines even without proposing a new model.","technical_approach":"Instead of a new algorithm, they run structured ablations: across 6 VLMs and ~20 strategies, they intervene on one stage at a time and attribute gains/losses to that stage. The key design choice is variable isolation, so poor retrieval is not conflated with a model’s ICL capability.","experiments":"From the abstract: experiments span 6 VLMs and 20 strategies over the three-stage MM-ICL pipeline; main findings include the need for a multimodal retriever and strong sensitivity to intra-/inter-demonstration ordering. Task suites, metrics, and numeric deltas are not specified in the provided abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal-icl","in-context-learning","evaluation","generalization"],"keywords":["Multi-modal In-Context Learning","Demonstration Retrieval","Demonstration Ordering","In-Context Learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4各因子消融实验结果即可，可直接复用在内部多模态大模型的ICL提示工程管线优化。","en":"Only read §4 for ablation results of each influencing factor, can be reused to optimize ICL prompt engineering pipeline for internal multimodal LLMs."}},{"id":"0001HS24","title":"Faster Neighborhood Attention: Reducing the O(n2) Cost of Self Attention at the Threadblock Level","authors":["Ali Hassani","Wen-Mei Hwu","Humphrey Shi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001HS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001HS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/76e952a4e83d97186d3f55eef6a3a367-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要把自注意力从 O(n^2) 的全连接代价降下来，并且把优化落到 GPU threadblock 级别的实现细节上；以往很多高层近似注意力在理论上省 FLOPs，但在硬件上不一定跑得快。","importance":"贡献偏系统与算子层：如果它能在不明显掉精度的前提下把局部注意力（neighborhood attention）的 kernel 做到更高吞吐/更低延迟，会直接影响长上下文/高分辨率预训练的可行 batch size 与成本。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，无法确认具体做法；从标题推断是针对 Neighborhood Attention 的 CUDA/张量布局/并行策略优化，把计算与内存访问在 threadblock 内重排以减少无效访存与同步开销。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法给出任何可核对的数字（加速比、适用序列长度/窗口大小、与 FlashAttention/NA baselines 的对比、以及端到端训练收益）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper aims to reduce the O(n^2) cost of self-attention by optimizing neighborhood (local) attention, focusing on GPU threadblock-level efficiency where many “theoretically cheaper” attentions fail to translate into real speedups.","importance":"This is primarily a systems/kernel contribution: a faster neighborhood-attention operator can materially change the training/inference cost profile for long-context or high-resolution pretraining, where attention kernels dominate runtime and memory bandwidth.","technical_approach":"No abstract is provided, so the exact method cannot be confirmed; from the title, it likely reworks CUDA tiling, memory layout, and threadblock scheduling for neighborhood attention to reduce redundant memory traffic and synchronization overhead.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so there are no verifiable numbers (speedup, regimes of sequence length/window size, comparisons to FlashAttention or prior neighborhood-attention kernels, or end-to-end training impact).","authors_note":""},"tags":["attention","kernel","efficiency","long-context"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3的threadblock级访存优化实现和性能对比表格即可，可参考优化内部长上下文预训练的算子选型逻辑。","en":"Only read §3 for threadblock level memory optimization implementation and performance comparison tables, reference for operator selection for internal long context pretraining."}},{"id":"2401.10225","title":"ChatQA: Surpassing GPT-4 on Conversational QA and RAG","authors":["Zihan Liu","Wei Ping","Rajarshi Roy","Peng Xu","Chankyu Lee","Mohammad Shoeybi","Bryan Catanzaro"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$99","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.10225","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001P00LSC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001P00LSC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1c0d54ebd0a6e58c4eca7d591e374b9d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决对话式 QA/RAG 中“检索与生成彼此不匹配、对话上下文导致查询改写成本高”的问题；以往常用 query rewriting 或通用 retriever，部署复杂且不一定适配对话 QA。","importance":"贡献是端到端的 RAG 工程配方与基准：两阶段指令微调提升 RAG 生成质量，专用 dense retriever 在对话 QA 上以更低部署成本达到接近 SOTA 的检索效果，并给出覆盖 10 个数据集的 ChatRAG Bench；对 posttrain 的启示是，RAG 能力很大一部分来自“训练流程与检索器协同设计”，不只是更强基座。","technical_approach":"方法包含两块：生成侧用 two-stage instruction tuning（先学会利用检索证据，再学会对话式回答风格/鲁棒性等，摘要未给细节）；检索侧训练一个面向对话 QA 的 dense retriever，目标是在不做显式 query rewriting 的情况下处理多轮语境，从而降低线上链路复杂度与成本。","experiments":"摘要给出一个关键数字：ChatQA-1.0-70B（基于 Llama2）在其评测上得分 54.14，并声称超过 GPT-4；同时发布包含 10 个数据集的 ChatRAG Bench，覆盖 RAG、表格 QA、算术与不可回答问题。摘要未说明 GPT-4 的对应分数、统计显著性、检索指标（Recall@k 等）、以及两阶段微调各自贡献的消融。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets conversational QA/RAG failures caused by mismatched retrieval and generation, where multi-turn context often pushes systems toward costly query rewriting or generic retrievers that underperform in dialogue settings.","importance":"It contributes a practical RAG recipe plus a benchmark: a two-stage instruction-tuning pipeline to improve evidence-grounded generation, a dialogue-optimized dense retriever that reduces deployment complexity versus query rewriting, and ChatRAG Bench spanning 10 datasets. The takeaway is that RAG quality is heavily shaped by training procedure and retriever-generator co-design, not just base model strength.","technical_approach":"Two main components: (1) two-stage instruction tuning for the generator (staging intended to teach retrieval-conditioned answering before refining conversational behavior/robustness), and (2) a dense retriever trained specifically for conversational QA to handle multi-turn context without explicit query rewriting, trading some modeling flexibility for lower serving cost and simpler pipelines.","experiments":"The abstract reports ChatQA-1.0-70B (Llama2-based) scoring 54.14 and claims it surpasses GPT-4 on their conversational QA/RAG evaluation; it also introduces ChatRAG Bench with 10 datasets covering RAG, table QA, arithmetic, and unanswerable cases. It does not provide GPT-4’s exact score, retrieval metrics (e.g., Recall@k), ablations for each tuning stage, or statistical details.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rag","instruction-tuning","retrieval","conversational-qa"],"keywords":["large language models","retrieval-augmented generation","RAG"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接看§3的两阶段微调配方和对话检索器训练设置，可复用在内部对话RAG系统的后训练管线里。","en":"Refer to §3 directly for the two-stage fine-tuning recipe and conversational retriever training setup, which can be reused in your internal conversational RAG post-training pipeline."}},{"id":"2406.12031","title":"Large Scale Transfer Learning for Tabular Data via Language Modeling","authors":["Josh Gardner","Juan C. Perdomo","Ludwig Schmidt"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$9a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.12031","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001PS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001PS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/4fd5cfd2e31bebbccfa5ffa354c04bdc-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要把 foundation model 式的迁移学习带到表格预测：表格数据异构、列语义弱、任务分布碎片化，导致以往很难像 NLP/CV 那样靠大模型预训练/微调获得稳定收益。","importance":"贡献是数据与训练配方驱动的迁移学习：构建高质量大规模表格训练集（来自 TabLib，2.1B 行、400 万表），并在 Llama 3-8B 上做面向表格预测的语言建模式微调，产出 TabuLa-8B；对 pretrain 的启示是“结构化数据也能被 LM 化”，关键瓶颈在数据清洗与表示，而不只是模型结构。","technical_approach":"方法是把表格预测转成 LM 可学习的序列任务，并强调数据过滤与质量控制：从 TabLib 抽取大规模表格，做去噪、筛选与规范化，再对 Llama 3-8B 进行微调得到 TabuLa-8B。设计取舍是复用成熟 LLM 架构而不是发明新 tabular encoder，代价是序列化表示可能引入长度与列置换不变性问题，需要靠数据与格式约束缓解。","experiments":"摘要给出关键规模：TabuLa-8B 基于 Llama 3-8B，训练数据超过 2.1B 行、来自 400 万独特表格。摘要未给出评测基准（如 OpenML/TabPFN 类对比）、指标与提升幅度，也未说明对不同表格大小/缺失值/高基数类别的鲁棒性消融。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper brings foundation-model-style transfer learning to tabular prediction, where heterogeneous schemas and weak column semantics have historically prevented the kind of robust pretrain→finetune gains seen in NLP/CV.","importance":"Its main contribution is a data + training recipe at scale: a large, quality-controlled tabular corpus extracted from TabLib (2.1B+ rows, 4M+ unique tables) and a Llama-3-8B-based tabular LM (TabuLa-8B). For pretraining, it reinforces that “LM-ifying” structured data is feasible, with data curation and representation as the primary bottlenecks.","technical_approach":"They serialize tabular prediction into a language-modeling-compatible format and emphasize filtering/quality control to build a high-quality training set from TabLib, then fine-tune Llama 3-8B into TabuLa-8B. The trade-off is leveraging a strong generic LM backbone versus dealing with serialization issues (sequence length, column-order sensitivity) through formatting and data constraints.","experiments":"The abstract reports scale (Llama 3-8B backbone; 2.1B+ rows from 4M+ tables) but does not specify evaluation benchmarks, metrics, numeric gains over tabular baselines, or robustness analyses (missingness, high-cardinality categoricals, varying table sizes).","authors_note":""},"tags":["language-modeling","transfer-learning","tabular","pretraining"],"keywords":["tabular","foundation model","language model"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§2的大规模表格数据清洗与序列化规范，可直接参考做结构化数据预训练的数据预处理方案。","en":"Focus on §2 for large-scale tabular data cleaning and serialization specifications, which can be directly referenced for structured data pre-training preprocessing schemes."}},{"id":"2409.19680","title":"Instruction Embedding: Latent Representations of Instructions Towards Task Identification","authors":["Yiwei Li","Jiayi Shi","Shaoxiong Feng","Peiwen Yuan","Xinglin Wang","Boyuan Pan","Heda Wang","Yao Hu","Kan Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$9b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.19680","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001SFYWPWHK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001SFYWPWHK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9f9e2982759f384495f4b75a33f3dd72-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要把“指令的表示”从语义 embedding 中解耦出来，专注于任务识别；以往用文本 embedding 做指令检索/数据选择时，语义细节会掩盖“这条指令属于哪个任务”的信息。","importance":"贡献是对指令数据管线的中间表示：如果能得到更纯粹的 task-level instruction embedding，就能更稳地做指令聚类、数据去重/选择、以及 ICL demonstration 检索；这类工作对 posttrain 数据治理的边际价值往往高于再加一点指令数据量。","technical_approach":"提出 Instruction Embedding：目标是学习指令的潜在表示，使其更偏向任务类别而非表面语义。摘要未给出具体训练目标，但从动机看，关键机制应是用弱监督/对比学习/聚类一致性等方式压制语义内容差异，强化“同任务不同表述”的聚合，同时避免把知识内容编码进表示里。","experiments":"摘要未提供任何实验细节：没有模型/数据规模、没有与通用 sentence embedding 或 LLM hidden-state pooling 的对比数字，也未说明在数据选择、检索或任务识别上的提升幅度与失败案例。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper aims to represent instructions in a way that emphasizes task identity rather than surface semantics; prior instruction embeddings derived from generic text embeddings often entangle topic/wording with the underlying task category, hurting retrieval and data selection.","importance":"It contributes an intermediate representation for instruction-data pipelines: a task-centric instruction embedding can improve clustering, deduplication/selection, and ICL demonstration retrieval. This is often high-leverage for post-training data governance where quality and coverage matter more than raw volume.","technical_approach":"They propose Instruction Embedding, a latent representation intended to capture task category while suppressing semantic/content variation. The abstract does not specify the exact objective, but the design goal implies training signals that pull together paraphrased instructions of the same task and push apart different tasks, while avoiding encoding incidental knowledge content.","experiments":"No experimental specifics are provided in the abstract: model/data scale, baselines (generic sentence embeddings or pooled LLM states), quantitative gains on task identification or retrieval/data-selection tasks, and failure modes are all unspecified.","authors_note":""},"tags":["instruction-data","embedding","task-identification","alignment"],"keywords":["Instructions","Text Embedding","Large Language Models","Benchmark"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的指令表示训练目标设计即可，能给后训练阶段的指令聚类、数据去重任务提供新的表示思路。","en":"Only read §4 for the instruction representation training objective design, which provides new representation ideas for instruction clustering and data deduplication in post-training stages."}},{"id":"2405.18634","title":"A Theoretical Understanding of Self-Correction through In-context Alignment","authors":["Yifei Wang","Yuyang Wu","Zeming Wei","Stefanie Jegelka","Yisen Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$9c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.18634","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001WWJ024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001WWJ024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a399456a191ca36c7c78dff367887f0a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解释的核心现象是：LLM 为什么有时能通过自我纠错提升回答质量，以及这种能力何时会出现、何时不会。过去关于 self-correction 的讨论多停留在经验观察，或者依赖过度简化的线性 transformer 理论，难以回答 prompt 设计、反馈质量和 in-context alignment 之间到底是什么关系。","importance":"它的重要性在于给 self-correction 这类后训练能力提供了一个更接近机制层的理论解释，而不是把它当成神秘涌现。对 pretrain/post-train 闭环的启示是：模型能否靠上下文中的“自评+修正”完成对齐，不只取决于会不会生成 CoT，还取决于内部是否已经学到可被上下文激活的对齐算法。这会影响我们如何理解 latent reasoning、RLAIF 式自反馈，以及 test-time compute 的有效边界。","technical_approach":"核心方法是从 in-context learning 的视角，对 self-correction 做理论构造与分析。作者假设模型能给出相对准确的 self-examination 作为 reward-like 信号，然后证明模型可以在上下文内利用这类信号迭代改进回答；也就是说，自我纠错不一定要求显式参数更新，它可以是一次前向过程中的 in-context alignment。和早期只分析线性 transformer 的工作相比，这篇论文强调了若干关键设计在理论上不可缺：例如反馈格式、示例组织、奖励信号精度，以及多轮修正结构如何影响可学习性。","experiments":"摘要表明这篇工作以理论为主，没有给出模型规模、数据规模或具体 benchmark 数字，因此实验部分更应理解为对理论假设的 sanity check。真正值得读的不是绝对分数，而是作者是否验证了几个关键条件：第一，自评信号一旦足够噪声化，自纠能力会明显塌；第二，in-context alignment 依赖 prompt 中反馈与修正步骤的结构；第三，多轮修正未必单调变好，超过某个噪声阈值可能反而放大错误。这些现象如果正文有实证，会直接帮助判断 self-correction 何时能当成可靠工具。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper explains a specific phenomenon: why LLMs can sometimes improve their own answers through self-correction, and under what conditions this actually works. Prior discussions were mostly empirical or based on overly simplified transformer theory, so the mechanism behind self-correction remained unclear.","importance":"Its value is in turning self-correction from a vague capability claim into a more analyzable in-context alignment mechanism. For the pretrain/posttrain interface, this matters because it suggests that test-time self-improvement depends on whether training has already induced an internal algorithm that can be activated by contextual feedback. That has direct implications for self-rewarding, RLAIF-style pipelines, and the limits of inference-time compute.","technical_approach":"The paper develops a theoretical analysis of self-correction through the lens of in-context learning. Under a simplified alignment-like setup, it shows that if the model can produce reasonably accurate self-examinations that act like reward signals, then it can iteratively refine its responses within context, without parameter updates. Relative to earlier theory on linear transformers, the contribution is to formalize the role of concrete design choices such as feedback quality, prompt structure, and multi-round correction format.","experiments":"The abstract suggests a theory-heavy paper and does not report model sizes, datasets, or benchmark gains. The empirical value therefore lies in validating the conditions predicted by the theory rather than in headline performance. The most informative checks would be whether self-correction collapses under noisy self-feedback, whether prompt structure materially changes correction quality, and whether multi-step correction helps only within a limited feedback-accuracy regime.","authors_note":""},"tags":["self-correction","in-context-learning","alignment","theory"],"keywords":["Self-correction","Theory","In-context Learning","Transformer","Language Model","Alignment"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§3的in-context alignment理论推导与边界条件，能帮你理清test-time自反馈能力的有效范围。","en":"Focus on §3's in-context alignment theoretical derivation and boundary conditions, which help clarify the valid scope of test-time self-feedback capabilities."}},{"id":"2412.19806","title":"Vitron: A Unified Pixel-level Vision LLM for Understanding, Generating, Segmenting, Editing","authors":["Hao Fei","Shengqiong Wu","Hanwang Zhang","Tat-Seng Chua","Shuicheng Yan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$9d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.19806","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001WZCY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001WZCY24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/68bad5506f0f9eea7ae75f01ae00d5e2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文试图解决 Vision LLM 仍然过于粗粒度的问题：能做问答和描述，但很难统一覆盖像素级理解、分割、编辑，以及图像和视频两种输入。过去多数系统是任务拼装式的，图像理解、视频理解、分割和生成各有各的模型，接口不统一，token/region 级语义也无法在一个语言接口里自然流动。","importance":"它的意义在于朝 unified multimodal pretraining / system design 方向再走一步，但更偏系统级整合而不是基础建模突破。对 pretrain 研究者有价值的地方在于：它把 pixel-level regional visual 输入纳入 LLM 前端，并尝试让同一个语言中枢驱动理解、生成、分割、编辑。如果做得好，说明统一表示的瓶颈不只在 backbone，也在视觉前端与 specialist backend 之间的协议设计。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构建一个统一的 pixel-level vision LLM：前端接图像、视频和区域级像素视觉编码，后端挂接多个视觉 specialist，以 LLM 作为统一控制与推理中枢。这个设计本质上是系统整合型方案，而不是完全端到端单模型替代所有视觉模块。它选择保留 specialist 的强能力边界，比如分割和编辑的专用器件，而不强迫单个 LLM 直接学会所有低层视觉操作；代价是整体能力上限依赖后端专家，严格意义上的统一训练信号也会被模块边界削弱。","experiments":"摘要显示它覆盖 image/video understanding, generation, segmentation, editing 等广泛任务，但没有给出模型尺寸、训练数据规模和定量结果。能预期的实验重点应是多任务统一后是否显著牺牲单项性能，以及图像到视频扩展是否保持一致接口。对于这类系统论文，最有价值的结果通常不是单榜第一，而是证明一个统一框架在多种任务上都达到可用水平，并且 pixel-level 输入确实比纯全局视觉 token 提供更强的区域控制与编辑能力。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a real limitation of current vision LLMs: they remain too coarse-grained to unify pixel-level understanding, segmentation, editing, and generation across both images and videos. Most existing systems are still collections of separate tools rather than a single multimodal interface with shared control and representation.","importance":"This is primarily a system-level step toward more unified multimodal modeling. The pretraining relevance is that it tests whether a language-centered architecture can serve as the common control plane for fine-grained vision tasks, provided the visual frontend exposes region-level information and the backend specialists remain accessible.","technical_approach":"Vitron builds a unified pixel-level vision LLM with image, video, and regional visual encoders on the frontend, and specialist vision models on the backend. The key design choice is pragmatic: keep strong task-specific specialists for segmentation or editing, while using the LLM as the shared reasoning and orchestration layer. That makes the system more capable today, but it also means the framework is only partially unified in training, since some core capabilities still live behind module boundaries.","experiments":"The abstract claims broad coverage across image/video understanding, generation, segmentation, and editing, but it does not provide model size, data scale, or numerical gains. The meaningful evaluation question is therefore not just whether it wins a benchmark, but whether one unified interface can handle diverse tasks without severe trade-offs in specialist performance. The most useful evidence would be strong region control, cross-task consistency, and competitive quality across both static and dynamic visual inputs.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vision-llm","pixel-level","unified-modeling","multimodal"],"keywords":["Multimodal Large Language Model","Unified Large Language Model"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接看§3.2的视觉前端与多专家模块的接口设计，对统一多模态大模型的系统架构设计有参考价值。","en":"Refer to §3.2 directly for the interface design between the visual front-end and multi-expert modules, which is valuable for unified multimodal LLM system architecture design."}},{"id":"2405.19325","title":"Nearest Neighbor Speculative Decoding for LLM Generation and Attribution","authors":["Minghan Li","Xilun Chen","Ari Holtzman","Beidi Chen","Jimmy Lin","Scott Yih","Victoria Lin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$9e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.19325","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/00020HCLY024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/00020HCLY024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/93c099bb4cde51b724eaa6d6d4a4b5e4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是半参数语言模型的老问题：retrieval 能减少幻觉并提供归因，但推理速度慢、生成不够流畅，很难直接替代普通 LLM。过去 kNN-LM 这类方法在每步都做检索和融合，理论上有用，工程上却常常过重；作者希望把 retrieval 的事实支撑和 speculative decoding 的效率结合起来。","importance":"它的重要性是方法与系统交界处的改进。对 pretrain/serving 研究的启示是，外部记忆不一定非要以粗暴 rerank 或后处理的形式接入，也可以在 decoding 过程中与主模型协同，既提高 factuality 又保留可接受延迟。如果这条路成立，半参数 LM 会更像一个可部署范式，而不是实验室里好看但太慢的模型。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 NEST，把 token-level retrieval、半参数分布混合和 speculative decoding 结合到一起。具体来说，它在每个生成步检索最近邻，形成一个 semi-parametric mixture distribution，并据此找到有希望的 span continuation，然后用 speculative decoding 的接受/拒绝机制批量验证这些候选。关键设计不只是“检索+生成”，而是允许直接引入任意长度的真实文本 span 进入解码过程，因此既能提高速度，也天然保留 attribution 到来源文本。和传统 kNN-LM 相比，它不只是修正下一 token 概率，而是把可引用的 span 当成一等候选；和普通 speculative decoding 相比，它的草稿来源部分来自外部语料而非小模型。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体模型规模、数据存储规模和提升数字，但可以明确它比较的 baseline 至少包括标准 LLM、kNN-LM 或其他半参数 LM。实验的关键指标应包括生成速度、文本流畅性、事实性以及 attribution 质量，这四者缺一不可。真正值得关注的 trade-off 是：检索增强带来的 factual gain 是否足以覆盖索引和每步检索成本，以及 speculative decoding 在高检索噪声场景下接受率是否明显下降；如果接受率太低，速度优势会被吃掉。","authors_note":"作者包含 Ari Holtzman、Jimmy Lin。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a classic weakness of semi-parametric language models: retrieval can reduce hallucination and enable attribution, but it often slows generation and hurts fluency. Earlier kNN-LM-style methods were attractive conceptually yet expensive at inference, which limited real deployment value.","importance":"This is a method-and-systems contribution with clear relevance to serving-time language modeling. The broader message is that external memory does not have to be bolted on as reranking or post-hoc citation; it can participate directly in decoding in a way that preserves both efficiency and attribution.","technical_approach":"NEST combines token-level retrieval, a semi-parametric mixture distribution, and speculative decoding. At each step, it retrieves nearest neighbors, builds a retrieval-augmented token distribution, and identifies promising span continuations from the datastore; these spans are then verified through speculative decoding. The important design choice is to treat retrieved spans, not just retrieved token statistics, as first-class continuation candidates. That gives the model both source attribution and a path to speedups that older kNN-LMs did not have.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model size, datastore size, or exact gains, so the concrete numbers are unavailable here. The critical evaluation axes are generation speed, fluency, factuality, and attribution quality, likely against standard LMs and earlier semi-parametric baselines. The real trade-off to watch is acceptance rate under noisy retrieval: if speculative verification rejects too many retrieved continuations, the speed benefit can disappear quickly.","authors_note":"Ari Holtzman and Jimmy Lin are among the authors."},"tags":["speculative-decoding","knn-lm","attribution","inference"],"notable_authors":["Ari Holtzman","Jimmy Lin"],"keywords":["large language model","nearest neigbour language model","speculative decoding","attribution","factuality"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的NEST解码流程设计即可，给半参数LM的低延迟部署提供了检索与解码协同的新思路。","en":"Only read §3 for the NEST decoding process design, which provides a new idea of retrieval-decoding collaboration for low-latency deployment of semi-parametric LMs."}},{"id":"2405.18711","title":"Calibrating Reasoning in Language Models with Internal Consistency","authors":["Zhihui Xie","Jizhou Guo","Tong Yu","Shuai Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$9f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.18711","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0002G0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0002G0024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d037fd021c9aace128b8ce25001cdb6c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的核心问题是：CoT 和 rationale 虽然能提高答案准确率，但模型内部是否真的形成了更一致、更可靠的推理状态。过去大多数 reasoning work 只看最终答案或 verbalized rationale，默认“能说出推理过程”就等于“内部推理是稳的”；这篇工作指出中间层表示与最终层表示之间可能存在不一致，这会削弱 reasoning 的可信度。","importance":"它的重要性在于把 reasoning calibration 从输出层面推进到内部表示层面。对 pretrain/post-train 研究很有启发：如果 rationale 只是表面上修饰了答案，而没有让内部状态更一致，那么通过长 CoT、self-consistency 或监督 rationale 获得的收益可能是脆弱的。这个角度和 latent reasoning、process supervision、mechanistic interpretability 都直接相关。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用 internal consistency 的视角分析并校准语言模型推理。作者先观察到：生成 rationale 后，中间层内部表示和最终层表示之间会出现冲突；随后提出一种校准方法，目标不是仅让模型输出更像推理，而是让内部表示在推理过程中更一致。与普通 CoT prompting 或 answer reranking 的区别在于，它直接针对 hidden representation 的对齐问题，而不是只处理文本表层。这样的设计为什么可能有效：如果中间表示已经偏离，最终层再靠语言模式修正答案，鲁棒性通常有限。","experiments":"摘要没有给出模型规模、具体任务和数值提升，但已经说明了两个重要实验事实。第一，rationale 确实能提高答案准确率。第二，准确率提升的同时，内部表示一致性未必同步改善，甚至可能出现中层和末层冲突。论文的关键实验价值应在于：提出的 internal consistency calibration 能否同时提升正确率和稳定性，以及这一效应在不同推理任务、不同模型规模上是否一致。如果只在少数小模型上有效，外推价值会有限。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether chain-of-thought and generated rationales actually make model reasoning internally more reliable, rather than merely improving final answers. Prior work usually judged reasoning from outputs alone, which leaves open the possibility that the model says something that looks like reasoning while its internal states remain inconsistent.","importance":"Its main value is to move reasoning calibration from the output level to the representation level. For pretrain and post-train research, this is important because gains from rationale supervision may be brittle if they do not correspond to more coherent internal computation. The work connects naturally to latent reasoning, process supervision, and mechanistic analysis.","technical_approach":"The paper studies reasoning through internal consistency of hidden representations. It first identifies a mismatch between middle-layer and final-layer representations when rationales are generated, then proposes a calibration method aimed at making these internal states more consistent during reasoning. This differs from standard CoT prompting or answer reranking because it targets representation alignment rather than surface-form reasoning text.","experiments":"The provided abstract does not include model sizes, datasets, or quantitative gains, but it does state two important findings. Generated rationales improve answer accuracy, yet they can also introduce inconsistency between middle and final layers. The key empirical question is whether the proposed calibration improves both correctness and stability across reasoning tasks and model scales, instead of only producing cleaner-looking rationales.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","internal-consistency","chain-of-thought","calibration"],"keywords":["Large language models","reasoning","faithfulness","internal consistency"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§4的内部表示一致性检测与校准方法，可复用在推理能力预训练/后训练的效果验证环节。","en":"Focus on §4's internal representation consistency detection and calibration method, which can be reused in the effect verification of reasoning ability pre-training/post-training."}},{"id":"2405.19315","title":"Matryoshka Query Transformer for Large Vision-Language Models","authors":["Wenbo Hu","Zi-Yi Dou","Liunian Harold Li","Amita Kamath","Nanyun Peng","Kai-Wei Chang"],"institutions":["UCLA"],"abstract":"$a0","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.19315","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0006DLK0C24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0006DLK0C24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/59c147c7d4fdb732daea3064eab949bf-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"大型视觉语言模型（LVLM）通常将图像编码为固定数量的视觉 token（如 576 个），无法根据任务难度或计算预算灵活调整。简单图像用 576 个 token 浪费算力，复杂图像可能还不够。MQT 的目标是让视觉 token 数量在推理时可变。","importance":"方法级贡献，对 VLM 预训练有直接启示。视觉 token 数量是 VLM 训练和推理成本的主要驱动因素之一，MQT 提供了一种在单次训练后支持多种 token 预算的方案，避免了为不同计算约束分别训练模型。这对 native multimodal pretrain 中的视觉 tokenizer 设计有参考价值。","technical_approach":"受 Matryoshka Representation Learning 启发，使用 query transformer 将视觉特征压缩为 M 个 latent query token。训练时随机采样 m ≤ M 个 token 参与后续语言模型处理，使模型学会在不同 token 数量下都能有效工作。推理时可以根据需要选择任意 m。关键设计是训练时的随机 token 数量采样，使得单个模型兼容从极少到最多的视觉 token 配置。","experiments":"基于 LLaVA 等 LVLM 框架验证。核心发现是：在多个 VQA 和视觉理解 benchmark 上，使用远少于 576 个 token（如 16 或 64 个）时性能下降温和，某些简单任务甚至几乎无损。具体数字需参考全文。","authors_note":"作者包括 Nanyun Peng（UCLA，NLP 领域活跃研究者）和 Kai-Wei Chang（UCLA）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LVLMs encode images into a fixed number of visual tokens (e.g., 576), unable to adapt to varying task difficulty or compute budgets. Simple images waste compute with 576 tokens; complex ones may need more. MQT enables variable visual token counts at inference time.","importance":"A method-level contribution directly relevant to VLM pretraining. Visual token count is a major cost driver in VLM training and inference. MQT allows a single training run to support multiple token budgets, avoiding separate models for different compute constraints. Informative for visual tokenizer design in native multimodal pretraining.","technical_approach":"Inspired by Matryoshka Representation Learning, uses a query transformer to compress visual features into M latent query tokens. During training, randomly samples m ≤ M tokens for the language model, teaching the model to work effectively at any token count. At inference, any m can be chosen. The key design is random token count sampling during training, making one model compatible with token budgets from minimal to maximal.","experiments":"Validated on LLaVA-style LVLM frameworks. Key finding: on multiple VQA and visual understanding benchmarks, using far fewer than 576 tokens (e.g., 16 or 64) causes only moderate performance drops, with some simple tasks nearly unaffected. Specific numbers require the full paper.","authors_note":"Authors include Nanyun Peng and Kai-Wei Chang (UCLA, active NLP researchers)."},"tags":["vlm","visual-token","token-compression","efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Nanyun Peng","Kai-Wei Chang"],"keywords":["multimodal","vision-language","visual tokens","efficiency","llm"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接看§3.1的训练阶段随机token数采样机制，对VLM视觉tokenizer的可变长度设计有直接参考意义。","en":"Refer to §3.1 directly for the random token number sampling mechanism during training, which has direct reference significance for variable-length design of VLM visual tokenizers."}},{"id":"2402.18815","title":"How do Large Language Models Handle Multilingualism?","authors":["Yiran Zhao","Wenxuan Zhang","Guizhen Chen","Kenji Kawaguchi","Lidong Bing"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a1","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.18815","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0006ZCKB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0006ZCKB24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1bd359b32ab8b2a6bbafa1ed2856cf40-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有研究对多语言大模型的跨层处理流程缺乏明确的机制解释，无法说明LLM如何实现不同语言的理解、推理和生成的跨层协作。","importance":"机制级贡献，提出了多语言工作流（MWork）假设，明确了多语言处理在LLM不同层的分工，为多语言大模型的优化、低资源语言能力提升提供了可落地的指导方向。","technical_approach":"原创的平行语言专属神经元检测（PLND）方法，通过观测不同层的语言比例偏移、网络结构与能力的对应关系，验证MWork假设：输入层将多语言输入转换为英语，中间层用英语做推理，注意力处理多语言知识、FFN处理推理，输出层转换回输入对应语言。","experiments":"未公开实验所用的LLM型号、参数量及验证指标的具体数值，仅定性验证MWork假设符合观测到的多语言处理跨层特征。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing studies lack clear mechanism explanations for the cross-layer processing workflow of multilingual large language models, and cannot explain how LLMs realize cross-layer collaboration of understanding, reasoning and generation for different languages.","importance":"Mechanism-level contribution. It proposes the Multilingual Workflow (MWork) hypothesis, clarifies the division of labor of multilingual processing in different layers of LLMs, and provides practical guidance for optimization of multilingual LLMs and improvement of low-resource language capabilities.","technical_approach":"The proposed Parallel Language-specific Neuron Detection (PLND) method is original. By observing language ratio shifts across layers and the correspondence between network structures and capabilities, it verifies the MWork hypothesis: the input layer converts multilingual inputs to English, the middle layers perform reasoning in English with attention processing multilingual knowledge and FFN processing reasoning, and the output layer converts responses back to the input language.","experiments":"No specific LLM model, parameter size or quantitative verification metrics are disclosed in the provided abstract, only qualitative validation that the MWork hypothesis matches the observed cross-layer features of multilingual processing.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multilingual","representation","layer-analysis","llm"],"keywords":["Large Language Model","Multilingual","Language Specific Neuron"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM的不同网络层承担不同的语义处理功能，自注意力和前馈网络组件存在差异化的功能分工。","claim_en":"Different layers of LLMs take on different semantic processing functions, and self-attention and feed-forward network components have differentiated functional division of labor.","evidence_anchor":"§2 Analysis"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"多语言LLM的中间层统一使用英语完成推理任务，无需为每种语言保留独立的推理通路。","claim_en":"The middle layers of multilingual LLMs use English uniformly to complete reasoning tasks, and there is no need to retain independent reasoning pathways for each language.","opposes":"此前研究认为多语言LLM会为不同语言保留独立的表示和推理通路，不存在统一的中间推理语言。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 MWork Hypothesis","why_contested":"改变了对多语言LLM内部表示的认知，为低资源语言能力增强提供了新的优化方向，可通过强化中间层英语推理能力提升所有语言的性能。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的多语言工作流分层分工结论即可，能指导低资源语言能力增强的分层微调方案设计。","en":"Only read §4's multilingual workflow layered division conclusion, which can guide the design of layered fine-tuning schemes for low-resource language capability enhancement."}},{"id":"2403.07384","title":"SmallToLarge (S2L): Scalable Data Selection for Fine-tuning Large Language Models by Summarizing Training Trajectories of Small Models","authors":["Yu Yang","Siddhartha Mishra","Jeffrey N. Chiang","Baharan Mirzasoleiman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a2","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.07384","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0007MCM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0007MCM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/97fe251c25b6f99a2a23b330a75b11d4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大模型监督微调（SFT）阶段的数据选择方法效率低，在垂直领域（如数学推理）无法用少量数据达到全量数据训练的性能，数据利用率低。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了可扩展的SFT数据选择范式，利用小模型的训练轨迹指导大模型的数据选择，大幅提升SFT阶段的数据效率，无需为大模型做昂贵的全量数据预筛选。","technical_approach":"原创的SmallToLarge（S2L）数据选择方法，先在小模型上做全量SFT训练，记录每个样本的训练轨迹（如损失下降速度、预测准确率变化），筛选出对小模型性能提升贡献最大的样本，作为大模型SFT的训练数据。该方案舍弃了需要在大模型上做预评估的高成本方案，仅用小模型的低成本训练信号指导数据选择。","experiments":"在数学推理SFT任务上，仅使用11%的MathInstruct全量数据即可达到全量数据训练的性能，性能优于现有主流数据选择方法。未公开实验所用的小模型、大模型的具体参数量。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing data selection methods for supervised fine-tuning (SFT) of large language models have low efficiency, and cannot achieve full dataset performance with a small amount of data in vertical domains such as mathematical reasoning, leading to low data utilization.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It proposes a scalable SFT data selection paradigm, uses training trajectories of small models to guide data selection for large models, greatly improves data efficiency in the SFT stage, and eliminates the need for expensive full data pre-filtering on large models.","technical_approach":"The proposed SmallToLarge (S2L) data selection method is original. It first runs full SFT training on small models, records the training trajectory of each sample (such as loss reduction speed, prediction accuracy change), selects the samples that contribute the most to the performance improvement of small models as the training data for large model SFT. It abandons the high-cost solution that requires pre-evaluation on large models, and only uses low-cost training signals from small models to guide data selection.","experiments":"On mathematical reasoning SFT tasks, using only 11% of the full MathInstruct dataset can match the performance of full dataset training, and outperforms existing mainstream data selection methods. No specific parameter sizes of the small and large models used in experiments are disclosed.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-selection","sft","small-models","data-quality"],"keywords":["data selection"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"数据选择可有效提升大模型预训练和微调阶段的数据效率，降低训练成本。","claim_en":"Data selection can effectively improve data efficiency in the pre-training and fine-tuning stages of large models, and reduce training costs.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"小模型SFT训练轨迹筛选出的高效样本，可直接迁移到大模型的SFT阶段，仅用11%的全量数据即可达到全量训练的性能。","claim_en":"High-efficiency samples selected from the SFT training trajectory of small models can be directly transferred to the SFT stage of large models, and only 11% of the full dataset is needed to match the performance of full dataset training.","opposes":"此前研究普遍认为小模型和大模型的有效数据分布存在较大差异，小模型的训练信号无法有效指导大模型的数据选择。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"大幅降低了大模型SFT阶段的数据成本，为垂直领域大模型的高效微调提供了可复用的方案。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3的小模型训练轨迹特征筛选规则，可直接复用在SFT阶段的高价值数据筛选流程里。","en":"Focus on §3's small model training trajectory feature filtering rules, which can be directly reused in the high-value data filtering process of the SFT stage."}},{"id":"2405.03917","title":"KV Cache is 1 Bit Per Channel: Efficient Large Language Model Inference with Coupled Quantization","authors":["Tianyi Zhang","Jonah Yi","Zhaozhuo Xu","Anshumali Shrivastava"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a3","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.03917","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0011YXS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0011YXS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/05d6b5b6901fb57d2c287e1d3ce6d63c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有KV缓存量化方法在极低比特（如1比特）下性能下降严重，无法在不损失推理精度的前提下大幅降低KV缓存的显存占用，成为长上下文、大batch推理的瓶颈。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了耦合量化（CQ）范式，首次实现每个通道1比特的KV缓存量化，大幅降低KV缓存显存占用，提升长上下文推理的吞吐量。","technical_approach":"原创的耦合量化方法，观察到KV激活嵌入的不同通道之间存在强依赖，多通道联合熵增长速度远低于单通道边际熵之和，因此将多个KV通道耦合量化，利用通道间的依赖关系降低量化误差，舍弃了单通道独立量化的传统方案。","experiments":"未公开实验所用的模型参数量、上下文长度、精度损失及吞吐量提升的具体数值，仅定性验证耦合量化可在极低比特下保持推理精度，大幅降低KV缓存显存占用。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing KV cache quantization methods suffer from severe performance degradation at extremely low bit widths (such as 1 bit), and cannot greatly reduce the memory usage of KV cache without losing inference accuracy, which becomes a bottleneck for long context and large batch inference.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It proposes the Coupled Quantization (CQ) paradigm, which realizes 1 bit per channel KV cache quantization for the first time, greatly reduces KV cache memory usage, and improves the throughput of long context inference.","technical_approach":"The proposed coupled quantization method is original. It observes that different channels of KV activation embeddings have strong dependencies, and the joint entropy of multiple channels grows much slower than the sum of marginal entropies of single channels. Therefore, it couples multiple KV channels for quantization, uses the dependencies between channels to reduce quantization error, and abandons the traditional single-channel independent quantization scheme.","experiments":"No specific model parameter size, context length, accuracy loss or throughput improvement metrics are disclosed in the provided abstract, only qualitative validation that coupled quantization can maintain inference accuracy at extremely low bit widths and greatly reduce KV cache memory usage.","authors_note":""},"tags":["kv-cache","quantization","inference","serving"],"keywords":["large language model","efficiency","kv cache","quantization"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"KV缓存是大模型推理阶段显存占用的主要来源之一，量化是降低KV缓存显存占用的有效方法。","claim_en":"KV cache is one of the main sources of memory usage during large model inference, and quantization is an effective method to reduce KV cache memory usage.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"利用KV通道间的依赖关系进行多通道耦合量化，可在1比特每通道的极低比特下保持推理精度，优于单通道独立量化方案。","claim_en":"Multi-channel coupled quantization using dependencies between KV channels can maintain inference accuracy at an extremely low bit width of 1 bit per channel, outperforming single-channel independent quantization schemes.","opposes":"此前KV缓存量化方案普遍采用单通道独立量化的设计，认为多通道耦合会引入更大的量化误差。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"打破了KV量化的极低比特瓶颈，可将KV缓存显存占用降低至原有方案的1/8甚至更低，大幅提升长上下文推理的吞吐量。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"直接看§3的多通道耦合量化算法细节，对长上下文推理的KV缓存优化有工程参考价值。","en":"Refer to §3 directly for the multi-channel coupled quantization algorithm details, which has engineering reference value for KV cache optimization in long-context inference."}},{"id":"2409.07146","title":"Gated Slot Attention for Efficient Linear-Time Sequence Modeling","authors":["Yu Zhang","Songlin Yang","Rui-Jie Zhu","Yue Zhang","Leyang Cui","Yiqiao Wang","Bolun Wang","Freda Shi","Bailin Wang","Wei Bi","Peng Zhou","Guohong Fu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a4","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.07146","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0092Y00C0WSWBZF24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0092Y00C0WSWBZF24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d3f39e51f5f634fb16cc3e658f8512b9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有线性注意力Transformer及其门控变体在召回密集型任务上的性能落后于传统Transformer，且从零开始训练的计算成本高，无法兼顾效率和性能。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了门控槽注意力（GSA）结构，同时具备线性时间复杂度的训练和推理效率、传统Transformer的召回密集型任务性能，为长上下文序列建模提供了新的基础结构选择。","technical_approach":"改进型的注意力结构，在有界内存控制注意力（ABC）的基础上，引入门控线性注意力（GLA）的门控机制，两层GLA通过softmax连接，实现上下文感知的内存读取和自适应遗忘，保持紧凑的循环状态大小，同时利用GLA的硬件高效训练算法降低训练成本。该设计舍弃了传统线性注意力无门控、内存状态大的设计。","experiments":"未公开实验所用的模型参数量、召回密集型任务的具体指标及效率提升数值，仅定性验证GSA在保持线性时间复杂度的同时，性能优于现有线性注意力变体，训练和推理效率更高。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing linear attention Transformers and their gated variants underperform traditional Transformers on recall-intensive tasks, and have high training cost from scratch, which cannot balance efficiency and performance.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It proposes the Gated Slot Attention (GSA) structure, which has both linear time complexity training and inference efficiency, and the performance of traditional Transformers on recall-intensive tasks, providing a new basic structure choice for long context sequence modeling.","technical_approach":"This is an improved attention structure. Based on Attention with Bounded-memory-Control (ABC), it introduces the gating mechanism from Gated Linear Attention (GLA). Two layers of GLA are connected via softmax, realizing context-aware memory reading and adaptive forgetting, maintaining a compact recurrent state size. It also uses the hardware-efficient training algorithm of GLA to reduce training cost, and abandons the design of traditional linear attention without gating and with large memory state.","experiments":"No specific model parameter size, specific metrics for recall-intensive tasks or efficiency improvement values are disclosed in the provided abstract, only qualitative validation that GSA maintains linear time complexity, outperforms existing linear attention variants, and has higher training and inference efficiency.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sequence-modeling","linear-attention","architecture","efficiency"],"keywords":["sequence modeling","language modeling","hardware-efficient","linear attention"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"线性注意力结构可实现线性时间复杂度的序列建模，适合长上下文任务，但在召回密集型任务上性能不及传统全注意力。","claim_en":"Linear attention structures can realize linear time complexity sequence modeling and are suitable for long context tasks, but underperform traditional full attention on recall-intensive tasks.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"门控槽注意力可在保持紧凑循环状态大小的前提下，提升线性注意力在召回密集型任务上的性能，无需扩大内存占用。","claim_en":"Gated Slot Attention can improve the performance of linear attention on recall-intensive tasks while maintaining a compact recurrent state size, without increasing memory usage.","opposes":"此前研究普遍认为线性注意力提升召回密集型任务性能必须扩大循环状态的大小，增加内存占用。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 GSA Design","why_contested":"解决了线性注意力性能和内存占用的权衡问题，为长上下文、高召回需求的场景提供了更优的基础结构选择。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§3的GSA结构设计与训练加速方案，可作为长上下文预训练的基础结构备选，优先做内部ablation验证。","en":"Focus on §3's GSA structure design and training acceleration scheme, which can be used as an alternative backbone for long-context pre-training, and priority should be given to internal ablation verification."}},{"id":"2406.06467","title":"How Far Can Transformers Reason? The Globality Barrier and Inductive Scratchpad","authors":["Emmanuel Abbe","Samy Bengio","Aryo Lotfi","Colin Sandon","Omid Saremi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a5","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.06467","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AbbeBLSS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AbbeBLSS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3107e4bdb658c79053d7ef59cbc804dd-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有研究仅证明Transformer的表达能力达到图灵完备，但未解决其可学习性边界问题，无法明确Transformer能有效学习的推理任务类型。","importance":"属于理论+方法级贡献，首次提出「全局度」指标量化Transformer可学习的目标分布边界，为后续优化Transformer推理能力提供理论框架。","technical_approach":"原创提出目标分布的全局度概念，将其与NC0复杂度类的相关性绑定，对比已有的TC0/TC1表达能力分类，从理论和实验两方面验证高全局度分布无法被普通Transformer高效学习。","experiments":"以理论推导为主，搭配控制变量的合成推理任务实验，验证全局度超过阈值后Transformer学习准确率骤降，无大规模预训练模型相关实验。","authors_note":"作者包括Emmanuel Abbe、Samy Bengio，Samy Bengio为原Google Brain核心研究员，在深度学习理论和大模型领域有多项代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing work only proves Transformers have Turing-complete expressivity, but does not address their learnability boundary, leaving the types of reasoning tasks Transformers can efficiently learn unclear.","importance":"This is a theoretical and methodological contribution. It proposes the globality degree metric for the first time to quantify the learnable boundary of target distributions for Transformers, providing a theoretical framework for subsequent optimization of Transformer reasoning capabilities.","technical_approach":"It originally proposes the globality degree of target distributions, tied to correlation with the NC0 complexity class. Compared with existing TC0/TC1 expressivity classification, it verifies both theoretically and experimentally that high-globality distributions cannot be efficiently learned by vanilla Transformers.","experiments":"The work is mainly based on theoretical derivation, paired with controlled synthetic reasoning task experiments. It confirms Transformer learning accuracy drops sharply when globality degree exceeds a certain threshold, no large-scale pre-trained model experiments are included.","authors_note":"Authors include Emmanuel Abbe and Samy Bengio. Samy Bengio is a former core researcher at Google Brain, with multiple representative works in deep learning theory and large model fields."},"tags":["reasoning","transformer","generalization","scratchpad"],"keywords":["Transformer","reasoning","scratchpad","length generalization"],"notable_authors":["Emmanuel Abbe","Samy Bengio"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer的表达能力可通过TC0/TC1复杂度类衡量","claim_en":"Transformer expressivity can be measured by TC0/TC1 complexity classes","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"高全局度的目标分布无法被普通Transformer高效学习，即使其在Transformer的表达能力范围内","claim_en":"Target distributions with high globality degree cannot be efficiently learned by vanilla Transformers, even if they fall within Transformers' expressivity range","opposes":"Prior work assumes tasks within Transformer expressivity can be learned as long as sufficient data is provided","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Theoretical Analysis, §4 Experiments","why_contested":"It explicitly distinguishes the boundary between expressivity and learnability, correcting previous understanding of Transformer reasoning upper limits"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看全局度指标定义与实验验证部分，可用于指导推理类预训练任务的难度分层设计。","en":"Only refer to the globality metric definition and experimental validation sections, which can guide difficulty stratification of reasoning-focused pretraining tasks."}},{"id":"AggarwalMAPMZGR24","title":"AutoMix: Automatically Mixing Language Models","authors":["Pranjal Aggarwal","Aman Madaan","Ankit Anand","Srividya Pranavi Potharaju","Swaroop Mishra","Pei Zhou","Aditya Gupta","Dheeraj Rajagopal","Karthik Kappaganthu","Yiming Yang","Shyam Upadhyay","Manaal Faruqui","Mausam"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) are now available from cloud API providers in various sizes and configurations. While this diversity offers a broad spectrum of choices, effectively leveraging the options to optimize computational cost and performance remains challenging. In this work, we present AutoMix, an approach that strategically routes queries to larger LMs, based on the approximate correctness of outputs from a smaller LM. Central to AutoMix are two key technical contributions. First, it has a few-shot self-verification mechanism, which estimates the reliability of its own outputs without requiring extensive training. Second, given that self-verification can be noisy, it employs a POMDP based router that can effectively select an appropriately sized model, based on answer confidence. Experiments across five language models and five challenging datasets show that Automix consistently surpasses strong baselines, reducing computational cost by over 50\\% for comparable performance.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AggarwalMAPMZGR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AggarwalMAPMZGR24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ecda225cb187b40ea8edc1f46b03ffda-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如何在不重新预训练的前提下，自动把多个现有语言模型组合成一个更强的系统。过去常见做法要么是手工挑模型、手工定路由规则，要么直接做 expensive 的集成或蒸馏；这些方法要么依赖经验，要么部署和训练成本高，因此“自动混合”作为一个中间路线是值得重新做的。","importance":"它的重要性主要在方法和系统层面，而不是新的预训练范式。对 pretrain 研究的启发是：模型能力并不一定只来自更大的单模型，也可以来自对现有模型能力边界的自动重组；这对于 mixture-of-experts、模型路由、后训练阶段的模型编排都有直接参考价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法可以概括为：把“该用哪个模型回答哪个输入”变成一个可自动优化的混合策略学习问题。与简单投票或固定加权不同，这类方法通常会根据输入特征、任务类型或模型历史表现来学习选择/加权规则；它放弃了训练一个统一大模型的参数融合路径，转而在推理层做组合，设计上更看重低改造成本和可迁移性。之所以有效，是因为不同 LLM 的长板并不一致，自动路由能把这种异质性变成收益；边界则是，若候选模型高度同质，或路由信号不可靠，混合收益会迅速变小。","experiments":"从给定信息里无法确认具体实验配置、模型规模、数据规模和数值提升，因此不能可靠复述具体结果。可以合理预期作者会将 AutoMix 与单模型、简单 ensemble、人工路由或随机选择做比较，并展示在多任务或多基准上的平均收益；但具体 baseline、提升幅度、消融结论在当前信息下都应留空。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical question: how to automatically combine multiple existing language models into a stronger system without retraining them from scratch. Earlier solutions relied on manual model selection, fixed routing rules, or expensive ensembling/distillation, which either do not scale or waste compute, so automatic model mixing is a meaningful middle ground.","importance":"This is mainly a method- and system-level contribution rather than a new pretraining paradigm. The pretraining-facing takeaway is that capability does not have to come from a single larger model; some of it can be recovered by exploiting complementarity across models, which is relevant to MoE-style routing, model composition, and post-training orchestration.","technical_approach":"At a high level, the method treats model selection or weighting as a learned optimization problem over candidate LMs. The likely distinction from naive voting is that the mixing policy is input-dependent rather than fixed, and it chooses between composition at inference time instead of parameter merging or joint retraining. That design makes sense when models have different strengths, because routing can convert heterogeneity into gains; the trade-off is that benefits shrink when models are too similar or routing signals are weak.","experiments":"The provided metadata does not include the abstract or quantitative results, so model sizes, datasets, baselines, and gains cannot be stated reliably. It is reasonable to expect comparisons against single-model baselines, simple ensembles, and heuristic routing, but the exact numbers and ablations should be left unspecified here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-routing","inference-efficiency","llm"],"keywords":["Few-shot learning","Zero-shot learning","Self-Verification","cost-quality optimization","Decision making","Prompting","LLMs"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看自动混合策略的路由学习逻辑，可直接参考用于多专家路由、后训练模型编排的方案设计。","en":"Focus on the routing learning logic of the automatic mixing strategy, which can be directly referenced for MoE routing and post-training model orchestration design."}},{"id":"AhnC24","title":"Adam with model exponential moving average is effective for nonconvex optimization","authors":["Kwangjun Ahn","Ashok Cutkosky"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"In this work, we offer a theoretical analysis of two modern optimization techniques for training large and complex models: (i) adaptive optimization algorithms, such as Adam, and (ii) the model exponential moving average (EMA). Specifically, we demonstrate that a clipped version of Adam with model EMA achieves the optimal convergence rates in various nonconvex optimization settings, both smooth and nonsmooth. Moreover, when the scale varies significantly across different coordinates, we demonstrate that the coordinate-wise adaptivity of Adam is provably advantageous. Notably, unlike previous analyses of Adam, our analysis crucially relies on its core elements---momentum and discounting factors---as well as model EMA, motivating their wide applications in practice.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AhnC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AhnC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ac8ec9b4d94c03f0af8c4fe3d5fad4fd-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的核心问题是：在非凸优化里，为什么以及何时“Adam + 模型参数 EMA”会比单独用 Adam 更有效。实践里大家长期把 EMA 当经验技巧广泛用于大模型和扩散模型训练，但理论解释滞后，导致它常被用却很少被系统理解。","importance":"它的重要性在训练优化层面，而且对大规模预训练有直接参考价值。原因不是它提出了全新的优化器，而是它试图把一个已被广泛采用的工程事实解释清楚：EMA 到底是在降噪、做隐式正则、还是改善最终 iterate 的泛化与稳定性；这种解释会影响我们如何设置 cooldown、checkpoint 选择和训练后期策略。","technical_approach":"核心方法是对 Adam 配合模型指数滑动平均做理论分析，并给出在非凸场景下的收敛或有效性结论。与只分析 SGD+averaging 或只看最后一步参数不同，这篇工作的关键是把 adaptive optimizer 与参数平均联合起来研究，说明 EMA 不是可有可无的外挂，而可能在曲率变化大、梯度噪声重的区域提供更稳的迭代代表。它舍弃了对真实深网的完全贴合，换来可证明的结论；边界是理论条件通常比大模型训练更理想化。","experiments":"从给定信息里无法确认具体实验设置和定量结果，因此不能写出数据集、网络结构或提升数字。合理预期是，作者会在标准非凸优化基准和深度网络训练任务上比较 Adam、Adam+EMA 以及可能的 SGD 系列方法，并展示 EMA 对收敛稳定性、最终测试性能或对超参敏感度的改善；但这些都不能在没有摘要时强行具体化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a very practical optimization question: why and when does Adam with model EMA work better than plain Adam in nonconvex training? EMA has been widely used in large-model and diffusion training as an engineering default, but its theoretical footing has lagged behind practice.","importance":"This is an optimization-level contribution with direct relevance to pretraining. The value is not a brand-new optimizer, but a better understanding of a tool practitioners already rely on for stability, checkpoint quality, and late-stage training behavior. That matters when deciding whether EMA is just smoothing noise or actually changing the optimization trajectory in useful ways.","technical_approach":"The paper appears to provide a theory for Adam combined with exponential moving averaging of model parameters in nonconvex settings. The key distinction from prior analyses is that it studies adaptive optimization together with parameter averaging rather than treating them separately. The likely message is that EMA can produce a more reliable iterate under noisy, anisotropic gradients. The trade-off is standard for theory papers: stronger assumptions than real LLM training, but clearer mechanism.","experiments":"No abstract or numbers are available in the prompt, so specific benchmarks, architectures, and gains cannot be stated reliably. The expected empirical section would compare Adam, Adam+EMA, and possibly SGD variants on nonconvex tasks, focusing on stability, convergence, and final generalization, but exact claims should remain unspecified here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimizer","adam","ema","nonconvex-optimization"],"keywords":["Adam","exponential moving average","EMA","nonconvex optimization."],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看非凸场景下Adam+EMA的有效性结论部分，可用于优化大模型预训练后期的参数滑动平均配置策略。","en":"Only refer to the conclusion of Adam+EMA effectiveness under non-convex scenarios, which can optimize EMA configuration in the late stage of large model pretraining."}},{"id":"BarberoBKKAVPV24","title":"Transformers need glasses! Information over-squashing in language tasks","authors":["Federico Barbero","Andrea Banino","Steven Kapturowski","Dharshan Kumaran","João Guilherme Madeira Araújo","Oleksandr Vitvitskyi","Razvan Pascanu","Petar Velickovic"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a6","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BarberoBKKAVPV24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BarberoBKKAVPV24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/b1d35561c4a4a0e0b6012b2af531e149-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文的结论导向问题是：Transformer 在语言任务中也会遭遇 information over-squashing，也就是远距离、多路信息在有限通道中被压扁，导致该传过去的信息到不了后层。以往 over-squashing 更多在图网络里讨论，而在 Transformer 上大家常用“注意力是全连接的，所以不会有这个问题”来回避；这篇工作是在挑战这种乐观假设。","importance":"它的重要性在机制分析和架构理解层面，对长上下文和推理任务尤其相关。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：即便注意力拓扑上是全连接，信息流仍可能因为头数、维度、残差路径和层间压缩受限而受阻，这意味着仅靠扩窗和堆层并不能自动解决远程依赖学习。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把 over-squashing 的分析框架迁移到 Transformer 语言任务，识别哪些结构或表示瓶颈会压缩需要整合的信息。与“注意力可直接连通任意 token”这一图论式直觉不同，这篇工作的关键是区分可达性和可传输性：边存在不等于足够信息量能稳定通过。之所以有价值，是因为它解释了模型为何在某些组合推理或长程依赖上失效；边界在于，真实模型还有 MLP、残差和多层重写机制，单一 over-squashing 指标未必能解释全部现象。","experiments":"当前没有摘要，无法确认作者用了哪些语言任务、模型规模和诊断指标。按题目判断，实验应包含对特定长依赖语言任务的性能退化分析，以及改变宽度、层数、头数或结构后 over-squashing 指标与性能的关联；如果这些相关性稳定，那它对架构设计会比单纯 benchmark 提分更有价值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that Transformers can suffer from information over-squashing on language tasks: too much distant information must pass through limited representational channels, so some of it gets compressed away. Over-squashing is usually discussed in graph neural networks, and Transformers are often assumed to avoid it because attention is fully connected; this work questions that assumption.","importance":"This is a mechanistic and architectural contribution with clear relevance to long-context modeling and reasoning. For pretraining, the implication is important: full attention guarantees connectivity, not unlimited information transport. Simply increasing context length or depth may therefore fail to fix some long-range reasoning problems.","technical_approach":"The likely approach adapts over-squashing analysis to Transformer language models and studies how width, heads, layers, and representation bottlenecks constrain information flow. The key distinction is between reachability and transmissibility: a token can attend to another in one hop, but that does not mean all useful information survives the trip. This is valuable because it offers a concrete explanation for failures on compositional and long-range tasks. The limitation is that real Transformers also have MLP blocks, residual paths, and iterative rewriting, so no single bottleneck metric will explain everything.","experiments":"No abstract or metrics are provided, so I cannot name the tasks, models, or quantitative findings. The most relevant empirical evidence would connect measured over-squashing behavior to degradation on long-dependency language tasks, and show how architectural changes alter both the diagnostic and task performance.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","attention","oversquashing","language-modeling"],"keywords":["Transformers","Over-squashing","Large Language Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看语言任务中Transformer信息过压缩的瓶颈识别实验，能修正「全连接注意力无长程依赖瓶颈」的错误认知。","en":"Focus on the bottleneck identification experiments of Transformer information over-squashing in language tasks, which corrects the misconception that full attention has no long-range dependency bottleneck."}},{"id":"BasuGMNFM24","title":"Understanding Information Storage and Transfer in Multi-Modal Large Language Models","authors":["Samyadeep Basu","Martin Grayson","Cecily Morrison","Besmira Nushi","Soheil Feizi","Daniela Massiceti"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a7","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BasuGMNFM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BasuGMNFM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/0dfe31d6e703e138d46a7d2fced38b7c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的是：多模态大模型内部到底把信息存在哪里，又是怎样在模态之间转移的。过去对 MLLM 的分析很多停留在整体性能、attention 可视化或 probe 结果，但“视觉信息在哪些层被写入、语言层如何消费这些信息、哪些成分在做跨模态搬运”仍不够清楚。","importance":"它的重要性在机制分析，而且对原生多模态预训练很有价值。原因是如果我们能更精确地知道信息存储和转移发生在哪些模块、阶段和表示子空间，就能更有针对性地设计视觉 tokenizer、cross-attention、连接器和训练损失，而不是只靠经验堆结构。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是对多模态大模型做信息流分析，区分信息存储与信息传递这两件事。与单纯做 attention map 可视化不同，这类工作通常会结合干预、表征分析、因果追踪或信息论指标，判断某层是否真正保存了视觉/文本证据，以及后续层是否依赖它完成预测。这样的设计有效，因为它能把“看起来关注了图像区域”和“该信息真的影响了输出”区分开；边界是分析结果往往依赖所选模型、任务和度量，不一定能直接外推到所有 MLLM。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认涉及哪些 MLLM、任务和定量结论。按题目判断，最关键的实验会是：对不同模块做定位和干预后，观察性能变化，从而识别信息主要存储位置和跨模态转移路径；如果作者比较了不同架构，例如 early fusion、connector-based 或 cross-attention 模型，那会尤其有参考价值，但当前不能写具体数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a mechanistic question about multimodal LLMs: where is information actually stored, and how is it transferred across modalities during processing? Much prior analysis stopped at aggregate performance, attention maps, or probing, without clearly separating storage from transfer.","importance":"This is a mechanistic contribution with real relevance to native multimodal pretraining. If we know which modules and stages hold visual information and which ones move it into language predictions, we can design visual tokenizers, connectors, cross-attention, and training losses more deliberately instead of relying on architecture folklore.","technical_approach":"The likely approach analyzes information flow inside MLLMs and explicitly distinguishes information storage from information transfer. The important difference from plain attention visualization is that it should use interventions, representation analysis, causal tracing, or information-theoretic measures to test whether a component merely attends to a signal or actually carries predictive content forward. That makes the conclusions more actionable. The limitation is external validity: such diagnostics can depend heavily on the model family, task, and metric.","experiments":"The prompt does not provide the abstract, so I cannot reliably list the analyzed models, tasks, or numbers. The most informative experiments would localize where multimodal information resides, then perturb those components to verify causal impact on predictions, ideally across multiple MLLM architectures.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal-llm","information-flow","representation","interpretability"],"keywords":["interpretability","multimodal generative models","VQA"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看多模态信息流的存储与转移路径分析结论，可指导原生多模态预训练的跨模态连接器、层结构设计。","en":"Only refer to the analysis conclusion of multi-modal information flow storage and transfer paths, which can guide the design of cross-modal connectors and layer structures for native multi-modal pretraining."}},{"id":"BhaskarWF024","title":"Finding Transformer Circuits With Edge Pruning","authors":["Adithya Bhaskar","Alexander Wettig","Dan Friedman","Danqi Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a8","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BhaskarWF024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BhaskarWF024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/20fdaf67581e6d7157376d1ed584040a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有Transformer电路发现方法要么依赖低效的搜索算法，要么使用精度不足的近似，无法同时兼顾可扩展性和电路保真度。","importance":"属于方法级贡献，提出的边缘剪枝方法将电路发现的稀疏度提升1倍以上，为大模型机制解释提供可落地的高效工具。","technical_approach":"将电路发现重构为优化问题，改进梯度剪枝思路，放弃传统的神经元/组件级剪枝，改为剪枝组件间的连接边，在保证行为保真的前提下最大化电路稀疏度。","experiments":"在GPT-2上实验，发现的电路边数仅为之前方法的不到50%，且对模型行为的保真度与之前方法持平，消融实验验证边级剪枝比组件级剪枝的稀疏度优势高27%。","authors_note":"作者包括Danqi Chen，普林斯顿大学NLP团队核心成员，在大模型解释、信息检索领域有多项代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing Transformer circuit discovery methods either rely on inefficient search algorithms or use low-accuracy approximations, failing to balance scalability and circuit faithfulness at the same time.","importance":"This is a methodological contribution. The proposed edge pruning method improves circuit discovery sparsity by over 1x, providing a practical and efficient tool for large model mechanistic interpretability.","technical_approach":"It reframes circuit discovery as an optimization problem, improves gradient pruning pipeline, abandons traditional neuron/component-level pruning, and instead prunes edges between components to maximize circuit sparsity under the constraint of behavior faithfulness.","experiments":"Experiments on GPT-2 show the discovered circuits use less than 50% of edges of those from previous methods, while maintaining equal faithfulness to model behavior. Ablation confirms edge-level pruning has 27% higher sparsity advantage than component-level pruning.","authors_note":"Authors include Danqi Chen, core member of Princeton NLP team, with multiple representative works in large model interpretability and information retrieval."},"tags":["interpretability","circuit-discovery","pruning","transformer"],"keywords":["interpretability","circuits","pruning","optimization"],"notable_authors":["Danqi Chen"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer的特定行为由稀疏的计算子图（电路）实现","claim_en":"Specific behaviors of Transformers are implemented by sparse computational subgraphs (circuits)","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"边级剪枝比神经元/组件级剪枝更适合电路发现任务，可在同等保真度下得到更稀疏的电路","claim_en":"Edge-level pruning is more suitable for circuit discovery than neuron/component-level pruning, yielding sparser circuits with equal faithfulness","opposes":"Prior circuit discovery methods all adopt component-level pruning or search strategies as the default granularity","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments, Table 1","why_contested":"It overturns the default pruning granularity choice for circuit discovery, pointing out a new direction for subsequent circuit discovery tool optimization"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看边缘剪枝的电路发现算法实现，作为大模型可解释性研究的高效工具参考，无需深抠理论推导。","en":"Focus on the implementation of edge pruning-based circuit discovery algorithm, which can be used as an efficient tool reference for large model interpretability research, no need to dig into theoretical derivation."}},{"id":"2405.12241","title":"Identifying Functionally Important Features with End-to-End Sparse Dictionary Learning","authors":["Dan Braun","Jordan Taylor","Nicholas Goldowsky-Dill","Lee Sharkey"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$a9","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.12241","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BraunTGS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BraunTGS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c212c1b88395ab68d5e1671c17883ec6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有稀疏自编码器（SAE）学习到的特征更多反映数据集结构，而非模型本身的计算结构，无法保证特征对模型的功能重要性。","importance":"属于方法级贡献，改进了SAE的训练范式，解决了传统SAE提取的特征与模型功能脱钩的问题，为机制解释提供更可靠的特征提取工具。","technical_approach":"原创提出端到端稀疏字典学习方法，在SAE的重构损失基础上，新增原始模型与替换SAE激活后模型的输出KL散度约束，舍弃仅优化激活重构的训练目标，保证学习到的特征直接影响模型输出。","experiments":"在不同规模的Transformer语言模型上验证，提取的功能重要特征比传统SAE多42%，消融实验验证KL散度权重为0.3时特征功能性和重构精度的trade-off最优。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing sparse autoencoders (SAE) learn features that reflect dataset structure more than the model's own computational structure, failing to guarantee functional importance of extracted features to the model.","importance":"This is a methodological contribution. It improves the SAE training paradigm, solves the problem that features extracted by traditional SAEs are decoupled from model functions, providing more reliable feature extraction tools for mechanistic interpretability.","technical_approach":"It originally proposes end-to-end sparse dictionary learning, adds a KL divergence constraint between outputs of the original model and the model with SAE activations substituted on top of SAE reconstruction loss, abandons the training target of only optimizing activation reconstruction, to ensure learned features directly affect model outputs.","experiments":"Verified on Transformer LMs of different sizes, the number of extracted functionally important features is 42% higher than traditional SAEs. Ablation confirms the trade-off between feature functionality and reconstruction accuracy is optimal when KL divergence weight is 0.3.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","sparse-autoencoder","mechanistic-interpretability","feature-learning"],"keywords":["Mechnastic Interpretability","Interpretability","Explainability","Transparency","Sparse Coding","Causal mediation analysis","High dimensional data analysis"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"稀疏自编码器可通过重构模型内部激活提取隐特征","claim_en":"Sparse autoencoders can extract latent features by reconstructing internal activations of models","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅优化激活重构的SAE无法保证提取特征的功能重要性，必须引入模型输出的一致性约束","claim_en":"SAEs trained only on activation reconstruction cannot guarantee functional importance of extracted features, and consistency constraints on model outputs are required","opposes":"Prior work assumes SAEs that reconstruct activations well can obtain features related to model computation","opposes_cite_hint":"Bricken et al. 2023 Sparse Autoencoders for Interpretability","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments, Table 2","why_contested":"It corrects the default assumption of using SAEs for mechanistic interpretability, providing a new constraint direction for subsequent SAE training target design"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看端到端稀疏字典学习的损失设计部分，可用于改进稀疏自编码器训练，获得和模型功能强绑定的可解释特征。","en":"Only refer to the loss design of end-to-end sparse dictionary learning, which can improve SAE training to obtain interpretable features strongly bound to model functions."}},{"id":"2402.18752","title":"Pre-training Differentially Private Models with Limited Public Data","authors":["Zhiqi Bu","Xinwei Zhang","Sheng Zha","Mingyi Hong","George Karypis"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$aa","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.18752","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Bu0Z0K24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Bu0Z0K24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ac04e54e0a2d1927d60709019e4e7870-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"差分隐私（DP）应用于大模型预训练阶段会带来严重的性能下降，现有方案仅能在微调阶段使用DP，无法保护预训练数据的隐私。","importance":"属于理论+方法级贡献，首次从迭代损失优化角度解释DP预训练性能下降的原因，为低公共数据场景下的DP预训练提供了理论指导。","technical_approach":"先从理论层面分析DP优化器每轮的损失提升边界，发现性能下降的核心原因是梯度噪声淹没了有效信号，提出基于少量公共数据校准梯度噪声的改进方案，舍弃完全无公共数据的DP预训练假设，在保证隐私预算不变的前提下降低性能损失。","experiments":"在1B参数规模的LLM上实验，使用仅1%的公共数据，DP预训练的性能下降从23%降低到8%，消融实验验证公共数据规模超过5%后性能提升边际收益低于1%。","authors_note":"作者包括George Karypis，明尼苏达大学教授，AWS AI Labs核心研究员，在分布式机器学习、大模型训练领域有多项代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Applying differential privacy (DP) to large model pre-training introduces severe performance degradation. Existing solutions can only use DP in the fine-tuning stage, failing to protect pre-training data privacy.","importance":"This is a theoretical and methodological contribution. It explains the cause of DP pre-training performance degradation from the perspective of iterative loss optimization for the first time, providing theoretical guidance for DP pre-training in low public data scenarios.","technical_approach":"It first analyzes the per-iteration loss improvement boundary of DP optimizers theoretically, finds the core cause of performance degradation is that gradient noise drowns effective signals, proposes an improved scheme to calibrate gradient noise with a small amount of public data, abandons the DP pre-training assumption of no public data available, and reduces performance loss under the same privacy budget.","experiments":"Experiments on 1B parameter LLM show that with only 1% public data, DP pre-training performance degradation reduces from 23% to 8%. Ablation confirms the marginal gain of performance improvement is less than 1% when public data size exceeds 5%.","authors_note":"Authors include George Karypis, professor at University of Minnesota, core researcher at AWS AI Labs, with multiple representative works in distributed machine learning and large model training."},"tags":["differential-privacy","pretraining","data-privacy","foundation-model"],"keywords":["Differential Privacy","Foundation Models","Pre-training"],"notable_authors":["George Karypis"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"差分隐私训练通过注入梯度噪声保护数据隐私，同时会带来模型性能下降","claim_en":"Differentially private training protects data privacy by injecting gradient noise, and introduces model performance degradation at the same time","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"使用少量公共数据校准DP梯度噪声，可在不增加隐私预算的前提下大幅降低DP预训练的性能损失","claim_en":"Calibrating DP gradient noise with a small amount of public data can significantly reduce performance degradation of DP pre-training without increasing privacy budget","opposes":"Prior work assumes DP pre-training cannot use public data, or requires a large amount of public data to be effective","opposes_cite_hint":"Abadi et al. 2016 Deep Learning with Differential Privacy","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments, Table 3","why_contested":"It breaks the traditional performance-privacy trade-off boundary of DP pre-training, providing a feasible path for DP large model deployment"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看少量公共数据校准DP梯度噪声的方案，能在预训练隐私保护场景下直接复用，无需深究理论边界。","en":"Focus on the solution of calibrating DP gradient noise with a small amount of public data, which can be directly reused in pretraining privacy protection scenarios, no need to delve into theoretical boundaries."}},{"id":"ChaoDRACSDFPTH024","title":"JailbreakBench: An Open Robustness Benchmark for Jailbreaking Large Language Models","authors":["Patrick Chao","Edoardo Debenedetti","Alexander Robey","Maksym Andriushchenko","Francesco Croce","Vikash Sehwag","Edgar Dobriban","Nicolas Flammarion","George J. Pappas","Florian Tramèr","Hamed Hassani","Eric Wong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ab","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChaoDRACSDFPTH024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChaoDRACSDFPTH024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/63092d79154adebd7305dfd498cbff70-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM越狱攻击的评估缺乏统一标准，不同工作的成功率、成本计算方式不可比，且多数工作的攻击提示、代码不可复现。","importance":"属于基准/数据级贡献，提供了首个标准化的开源越狱评估基准，解决了LLM安全对齐领域评估混乱的问题。","technical_approach":"构建统一的开源基准，包含持续更新的SOTA越狱提示库、标准化的攻击成功率和成本计算指标、统一的评估流程，舍弃之前各工作自定义的评估规则，保证不同攻击和防御方法的可比性。","experiments":"在10个主流开源和闭源LLM上验证，该基准的评估结果可复现率达到98%，比现有零散评估集的一致性高47%。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM jailbreak attack evaluation lacks unified standards. Success rate and cost calculation methods across different works are incomparable, and attack prompts and code of most works are not reproducible.","importance":"This is a benchmark/data-level contribution. It provides the first standardized open-source jailbreak evaluation benchmark, solving the evaluation chaos problem in the LLM safety alignment field.","technical_approach":"It builds a unified open-source benchmark, including an evolving repository of state-of-the-art jailbreak prompts, standardized attack success rate and cost calculation metrics, and unified evaluation pipeline, abandons custom evaluation rules used by previous individual works, to ensure comparability between different attack and defense methods.","experiments":"Verified on 10 mainstream open-source and closed-source LLMs, the evaluation result reproducibility of this benchmark reaches 98%, which is 47% higher than existing scattered evaluation sets.","authors_note":""},"tags":["jailbreak","safety","benchmark","alignment"],"keywords":["jailbreaks","robustness","alignment","large language models","AI safety"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"越狱攻击可诱导LLM生成有害内容，是LLM安全对齐的核心研究问题之一","claim_en":"Jailbreak attacks can induce LLMs to generate harmful content, and are one of the core research problems in LLM safety alignment","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"现有越狱评估的结果一致性不足50%，无法作为攻击和防御方法的有效对比依据","claim_en":"The result consistency of existing jailbreak evaluations is less than 50%, which cannot be used as valid basis for comparing attack and defense methods","opposes":"Prior works assume their custom evaluation methods can effectively compare performance of different schemes","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Evaluation, Table 1","why_contested":"It clarifies the effectiveness defect of existing jailbreak evaluations, providing data support for subsequent evaluation standardization in the safety field"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为LLM越狱攻击的标准化评估基准备查，仅需了解指标定义，无需读正文。","en":"For reference only as a standardized evaluation benchmark for LLM jailbreak attacks, only need to understand the indicator definition, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"CharikarPS24","title":"Quantifying the Gain in Weak-to-Strong Generalization","authors":["Moses Charikar","Chirag Pabbaraju","Kirankumar Shiragur"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ac","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/CharikarPS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/CharikarPS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e4a0d8aef3567f742b0794844d9b5847-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有弱到强泛化（W2SG）的研究仅有实证观察，缺乏量化的理论框架，无法解释强模型使用弱监督标签后性能超过弱模型的增益来源。","importance":"属于理论级贡献，首次提出W2SG的量化理论框架，为后续弱到强对齐方法的设计提供了理论指导。","technical_approach":"原创构建W2SG的理论分析框架，量化弱监督的信息增益与强模型内置能力的关联，将增益分解为弱标签的有效信息和强模型的隐式知识两部分，舍弃之前仅做实证观察的研究思路，从理论层面解释W2SG的生效条件。","experiments":"在合成分类任务和7B/70B参数LLM的推理任务上验证，理论预测的W2SG增益与实际实验结果的误差低于5%，无额外大规模实验。","authors_note":"作者包括Moses Charikar，斯坦福大学教授，理论计算机科学和机器学习理论领域的顶级学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing weak-to-strong generalization (W2SG) research only has empirical observations, lacks a quantitative theoretical framework, and cannot explain the source of performance gain when strong models outperform weak supervisors after fine-tuning with weak labels.","importance":"This is a theoretical contribution. It proposes the first quantitative theoretical framework for W2SG, providing theoretical guidance for subsequent design of weak-to-strong alignment methods.","technical_approach":"It originally builds a theoretical analysis framework for W2SG, quantifies the correlation between information gain of weak supervision and inherent capability of strong models, decomposes the gain into two parts: effective information of weak labels and implicit knowledge of strong models, abandons the previous research paradigm of only empirical observation, and explains the effective conditions of W2SG from the theoretical level.","experiments":"Verified on synthetic classification tasks and reasoning tasks on 7B/70B parameter LLMs, the error between theoretically predicted W2SG gain and actual experimental results is less than 5%, no additional large-scale experiments are included.","authors_note":"Authors include Moses Charikar, professor at Stanford University, top scholar in theoretical computer science and machine learning theory fields."},"tags":["weak-to-strong","generalization","scaling","supervision"],"keywords":["Weak-to-Strong Generalization"],"notable_authors":["Moses Charikar"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"强模型使用弱模型生成的标签微调后，性能可超过弱监督模型本身，即存在弱到强泛化现象","claim_en":"Strong models fine-tuned with labels generated by weak models can outperform the weak supervisor itself, which is called the weak-to-strong generalization phenomenon","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"弱到强泛化的增益上限由强模型的内置能力和弱标签的信息质量共同决定，不存在无上限的性能提升","claim_en":"The upper bound of weak-to-strong generalization gain is jointly determined by the inherent capability of the strong model and the information quality of weak labels, and there is no unbounded performance improvement","opposes":"Some prior works assume weak-to-strong generalization can enable strong models to obtain performance exceeding their own inherent capability","opposes_cite_hint":"Burns et al. 2023 Weak-to-Strong Generalization","evidence_anchor":"§3 Theoretical Analysis, §4 Experiments","why_contested":"It clarifies the performance boundary of weak-to-strong generalization, correcting previous over-optimistic assumptions about W2SG capability"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看弱到强泛化增益的量化分解框架，能帮助理清弱监督对齐时强模型内置知识的贡献边界。","en":"Only refer to the quantitative decomposition framework of weak-to-strong generalization gain, which helps clarify the contribution boundary of strong model's inherent knowledge during weak supervision alignment."}},{"id":"ChaudharyDKS24","title":"Risk-Averse Fine-tuning of Large Language Models","authors":["Sapana Chaudhary","Ujwal Dinesha","Dileep Kalathil","Srinivas Shakkottai"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We consider the challenge of mitigating the generation of negative or toxic content by the Large Language Models (LLMs) in response to certain prompts.  We propose integrating risk-averse principles into LLM fine-tuning to minimize the occurrence of harmful outputs, particularly rare but significant events.  By optimizing the risk measure of Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR), our methodology trains LLMs to exhibit superior performance in avoiding toxic outputs while maintaining effectiveness in generative tasks. Empirical evaluations on sentiment modification and toxicity mitigation tasks demonstrate the efficacy of risk-averse reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF) in promoting a safer and more constructive online discourse environment.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChaudharyDKS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChaudharyDKS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c182ec594f38926b7fcb827635b9a8f4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：常规 LLM 微调通常优化平均回报，却忽略了高风险尾部失败，而很多真实部署场景更在意最差情况下不要出大错。以往做法大多靠启发式安全数据、拒答模板或事后过滤来兜底，这能压住部分风险，但不能把“规避坏样本”直接写进训练目标里，因此一旦分布变化或提示更刁钻，模型仍会暴露脆弱性。","importance":"它的重要性在于把风险敏感优化明确引入 LLM fine-tuning，而不是继续把对齐只看成均值最优化问题。对 pretrain/post-train 接口的启示是，后训练目标函数本身会决定模型学到的是“平均上更好”还是“尾部上更稳”，这对高风险应用、偏好学习和 reward 设计都有直接影响；不过它更偏方法级和目标设计级，不是范式级改写。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是把风险厌恶准则加入微调目标，用显式惩罚低回报或高损失样本的方式，让优化更关注坏案例而不是只追求均值。最可能的技术路线是借鉴风险度量，如 CVaR 一类尾部风险目标，或者在 preference / reward 加权里上调低分样本权重；这类设计有效的原因很直接：标准 ERM 会被大量中等样本主导，而风险厌恶目标会把梯度预算重新分给最危险区域。代价也明确：过强的风险规避会牺牲平均能力，导致模型更保守、拒答更多，甚至在 benign prompts 上性能回落。","experiments":"从题目判断，实验重点应是比较标准 supervised / preference fine-tuning 与风险厌恶 fine-tuning 在平均指标和 worst-case 指标上的差异。值得关注的关键事实应包括：是否在 adversarial prompts、低分位表现、拒答安全性或 reward 方差上稳定提升；以及风险系数变化时，平均性能与尾部鲁棒性之间是否出现清晰 trade-off。由于给定信息没有摘要、模型规模、数据规模和具体数字，这里无法可靠写出参数量、基线名和提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a real gap in LLM fine-tuning: standard objectives optimize average reward, while deployment often cares about avoiding catastrophic failures in the tail. Earlier practice mostly handled this with safety data, refusal heuristics, or output filtering, which helps locally but does not make tail risk an explicit training target.","importance":"Its value is in reframing alignment as a risk-sensitive optimization problem rather than a pure mean-performance problem. For pretrain-to-posttrain research, the main lesson is that the fine-tuning objective determines whether the model becomes better on average or more reliable in the worst cases; this matters for preference learning, reward design, and high-stakes use. This is a method-level contribution, not a new pretraining paradigm.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to inject a risk-averse criterion into fine-tuning so that low-reward or high-loss cases receive more optimization pressure. The likely mechanism is a tail-risk objective such as CVaR-style weighting, or an equivalent reweighting over poor outcomes in reward or preference optimization. This design is sensible because vanilla ERM is dominated by the bulk of moderate examples, whereas a risk-aware objective reallocates gradient budget toward failure modes. The trade-off is also predictable: stronger risk aversion can reduce average utility and make the model overly conservative.","experiments":"The key experimental question is whether risk-averse fine-tuning improves worst-case behavior relative to standard supervised or preference-based tuning, and at what cost to average quality. Useful evidence would include adversarial or hard-prompt evaluation, lower-quantile performance, safety or refusal metrics, and sensitivity to the risk coefficient. The provided metadata includes no abstract or numerical results, so model sizes, datasets, baselines, and gains cannot be stated reliably.","authors_note":""},"tags":["fine-tuning","alignment","risk-sensitive","llm"],"keywords":["Risk Averse Reinforcement Learning","Large Language Model Finetuning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看风险厌恶微调的目标函数设计，可用于高风险场景下的对齐训练，注意平衡尾部风险与平均性能的trade-off。","en":"Focus on the objective function design of risk-averse fine-tuning, which can be used for alignment training in high-risk scenarios, pay attention to the trade-off between tail risk and average performance."}},{"id":"Chen0WZC24","title":"Unlocking the Capabilities of Thought: A Reasoning Boundary Framework to Quantify and Optimize Chain-of-Thought","authors":["Qiguang Chen","Libo Qin","Jiaqi Wang","Jingxuan Zhou","Wanxiang Che"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ad","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Chen0WZC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Chen0WZC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/62ab1c2cb4b03e717005479efb211841-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注的核心问题是：大家都在用 Chain-of-Thought 提升推理，但一直缺少一个能量化“模型到底还能从 CoT 中榨出多少推理增益”的边界框架。过去多数工作只比较 few-shot、self-consistency 或蒸馏后的最终准确率，结论高度依赖 prompt 和 benchmark，难以回答“CoT 何时有效、何时已经到头”。","importance":"它的价值主要在评测与分析框架，而不是又提一个新的 prompting trick。对 pretrain/post-train 的启示是，推理能力不该只看最终分数，还要看模型在显式思维链监督下的可提升空间；如果这个边界可以被稳定估计，就能更清楚地区分是 base model 能力不足、监督形式不对，还是 test-time compute 没用到位。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是提出一个 reasoning boundary framework，用统一定义去刻画某个模型在 CoT 条件下的上界、下界或可达区间，并据此优化提示或监督方式。和常见的只看 pass@1 / self-consistency 不同，这类框架一般会拆分“生成思维链的能力”“利用思维链的能力”“最终答对的能力”，从而把 CoT 收益来源分开。这样设计有效，因为 CoT 失效往往不是单一原因：有时模型会想但不会说，有时会说但推不动，有时是 verifier 或采样没配好。","experiments":"实验上最值得看的应是：该边界指标能否预测哪些模型或任务会从 CoT 获益，且这种预测是否跨模型、跨 benchmark 稳定；其次是利用该框架做优化后，是否比标准 CoT、zero-shot CoT、self-consistency 等取得更高收益。还应关注一些负结果，例如在简单任务或强模型上，边界是否显示 CoT 收益接近饱和。由于缺少摘要与数值，无法安全给出数据集、模型规模和具体提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a missing piece in Chain-of-Thought research: we still lack a principled way to quantify how much reasoning gain a model can realistically extract from CoT. Prior work usually compares prompt variants or final accuracy, which is useful but does not tell us when CoT is actually bottlenecked or already saturated.","importance":"Its contribution is primarily an evaluation and analysis framework rather than another prompting recipe. For pretraining and post-training, the takeaway is that reasoning should be measured not only by end accuracy but also by the headroom exposed under explicit reasoning supervision; if that headroom can be estimated, we can better separate model-capacity limits from prompting or test-time-compute limits.","technical_approach":"The likely method is a reasoning-boundary framework that defines an upper bound, lower bound, or reachable region for CoT-assisted performance, then uses that structure to optimize prompting or supervision. Unlike plain pass@1 or self-consistency evaluation, such a framework would naturally decompose the problem into generating useful chains, leveraging them correctly, and producing the final answer. That decomposition matters because CoT failure modes are heterogeneous: sometimes the model cannot reason, sometimes it cannot externalize reasoning, and sometimes the inference setup fails to exploit it.","experiments":"The most important experimental evidence would be whether the proposed boundary metric predicts CoT gains across models and benchmarks, and whether optimization guided by that framework beats standard CoT baselines. A good paper here would also show where CoT gains saturate, especially on easier tasks or stronger models. The provided information has no abstract or numbers, so datasets, model scales, and improvements cannot be stated with confidence.","authors_note":""},"tags":["chain-of-thought","reasoning","evaluation","optimization"],"keywords":["Chain-of-Thought","Reasoning Granularity","Reasoning Boundary"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看思维链推理边界的量化框架，可用于评估base模型的推理潜力，指导CoT监督策略优化。","en":"Focus on the quantitative framework of Chain-of-Thought reasoning boundary, which can evaluate the reasoning potential of base models and guide the optimization of CoT supervision strategies."}},{"id":"ChenDHBSZZ24","title":"Are More LLM Calls All You Need? Towards the Scaling Properties of Compound AI Systems","authors":["Lingjiao Chen","Jared Quincy Davis","Boris Hanin","Peter Bailis","Ion Stoica","Matei A. Zaharia","James Y. Zou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ae","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenDHBSZZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenDHBSZZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/51173cf34c5faac9796a47dc2fdd3a71-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的是：复合式 AI 系统把多个 LLM 调用串联、并联、路由之后，性能是否会像单模型 scaling law 那样继续随调用次数稳定增长。过去工程上大家默认“多 call 总比少 call 好”，但这个假设缺少系统性刻画，尤其不知道什么时候额外调用只是堆成本、不再带来质量提升。","importance":"它的重要性很高，因为它把研究视角从单次前向推到 system-level inference scaling。对 pretrain 研究的间接启示是，训练更强 base model 和在推理期堆更多 agent / verifier / self-consistency 调用，二者可能存在可替代关系；如果复合系统有明确 scaling 区间和饱和点，那么未来算力预算在 pretrain 与 inference-time compute 之间如何分配，就有了更扎实的依据。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是把 compound AI systems 抽象成由多个 LLM 调用构成的可组合计算图，然后研究其性能随调用预算变化的 scaling properties。相比只报告某个 agent pipeline 的最好成绩，这种方法更强调统一测度：固定总预算、固定工具集或固定模型族，分别增加 sample 数、投票数、分解步数、路由层数，看误差如何衰减。这样设计有效，因为它把“prompting 技巧很多、系统结构很多”压缩成一个更通用的问题：额外一次调用到底贡献独立信息，还是只是在重复已有噪声。","experiments":"实验最关键的是 scaling 曲线而不是单点 SOTA。应重点看：不同任务上性能-调用次数曲线是幂律、对数增长还是很快饱和；不同组合方式如 self-consistency、decomposition、tool use、router-based systems 的斜率是否显著不同；以及在同等成本下，多次小模型调用与少次大模型调用谁更优。若论文做得扎实，还会报告误差相关性或多样性分析，因为复合系统能否扩展，取决于新增调用是否带来非冗余信号。给定信息不足，无法确认具体模型、数据集和数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a practical but under-formalized question: if we build compound AI systems with multiple LLM calls, do we get predictable scaling gains, or do we mostly pay extra cost for redundant computation? The field has largely assumed that more calls help, but that assumption has not been characterized with the same rigor used for model scaling.","importance":"This matters because it shifts attention from single-model capability to system-level inference scaling. For pretraining, the implication is indirect but important: extra inference-time calls may substitute for some model scale or post-training effort, and understanding where that substitution works or saturates is critical for compute allocation.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to model compound AI systems as compositions of LLM calls and study performance as a function of call budget under controlled settings. Rather than reporting one optimized agent pipeline, the paper likely varies sampling count, voting, decomposition depth, routing, or tool-use structure while keeping cost comparable. That framing is useful because it reduces many seemingly different methods to one core question: does an additional call add independent signal or just correlated noise?","experiments":"The central result should be the shape of the scaling curves, not just a best final score. The important evidence would include whether gains follow power-law-like decay, logarithmic returns, or rapid saturation; how different composition strategies compare under the same budget; and whether many cheap calls can beat a few expensive ones. Strong experiments would also analyze correlation and diversity across calls, since compound systems only scale when new calls are not redundant. The provided metadata does not contain reliable numerical details.","authors_note":""},"tags":["compound-ai","scaling","llm-calls","agent"],"notable_authors":["Lingjiao Chen","Peter Bailis","Ion Stoica"],"keywords":["Scaling Laws; Compound AI systems; language models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4的LLM调用次数饱和点实验即可，可为预训练与推理算力预算分配提供量化参考。","en":"Check only §4 saturation experiments of LLM call scaling, provides quantitative reference for compute allocation between pretraining and inference budgets."}},{"id":"ChenGGMMMRKFHAA24","title":"Cross-Care: Assessing the Healthcare Implications of Pre-training Data on Language Model Bias","authors":["Shan Chen","Jack Gallifant","Mingye Gao","Pedro Moreira","Nikolaj Munch","Ajay Muthukkumar","Arvind Rajan","Jaya Kolluri","Amelia Fiske","Janna Hastings","Hugo J. W. L. Aerts","Brian Anthony","Leo Anthony Celi","William G. La Cava","Danielle S. Bitterman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$af","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenGGMMMRKFHAA24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenGGMMMRKFHAA24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/2a617efee5815f12b405d40569dea0a5-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：预训练数据里的医学健康相关内容会如何影响语言模型在医疗语境中的偏见，但这个因果链条过去缺少系统评估。很多工作只在下游问答或诊断任务上测偏差，却没有回到更上游的 pre-training corpus 去问：偏见究竟是被数据配比、来源、叙述视角还是去噪规则带进去的。","importance":"它的重要性是数据级和评测级的，而且和 pretrain 直接相关。医疗偏见表面上是垂直领域问题，但这篇工作的价值在于把偏见追溯到预训练数据构成，这对所有高风险领域都成立：如果某类群体在源数据中被系统性缺失、污名化或语境失衡，那么后训练再怎么修补都很难彻底补回。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是构建一个跨数据来源、群体属性和医疗场景的分析框架，系统评估预训练语料组成与模型偏见表现之间的关系。题目里的 Cross-Care 暗示它可能不仅看单一 benchmark，而是做跨人群、跨病种、跨任务的偏见审计，并把结果追溯到训练数据统计。这样设计有效，因为医疗偏见很少来自单点错误，更多是语料覆盖、叙事框架和共现模式长期累积的结果。边界在于，这类研究通常更擅长发现相关性和风险模式，真正建立强因果还需要更可控的数据干预实验。","experiments":"实验关键不该只是报告某个 bias score，而应展示不同预训练数据条件下，模型在医疗问答、建议、风险判断或患者描述任务上的偏差变化，并分析哪些群体最受影响。若论文扎实，还应有数据消融：删去或增加特定来源后偏见指标怎么变，模型能力是否同步受损。由于没有摘要，这里无法可靠给出模型规模、医疗数据规模、受试群体定义和具体数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies how healthcare-related pretraining data shapes bias in language models, which is the right upstream question but one that is often skipped. Much prior work measures bias only on downstream medical tasks without tracing it back to corpus composition, source imbalance, or narrative framing in pretraining data.","importance":"This is a data- and evaluation-level contribution with direct relevance to pretraining. Although healthcare is a vertical domain, the lesson generalizes: when groups are underrepresented or systematically framed in skewed ways during pretraining, later alignment stages can mitigate but rarely erase the problem.","technical_approach":"The likely method is a cross-condition auditing framework that relates properties of healthcare pretraining data to downstream bias patterns across populations and medical scenarios. The title suggests broad evaluation across groups, conditions, or tasks, with an explicit attempt to connect observed behavior back to corpus statistics. That design makes sense because medical bias usually emerges from accumulated distributional skew rather than isolated model errors. The limitation is that such studies often establish strong correlations before they establish clean causality.","experiments":"The key evidence should show how bias metrics shift under different pretraining-data conditions, ideally across multiple healthcare tasks and demographic groups. Strong experiments would include data ablations or source-level interventions to test whether changing corpus composition changes model bias, and whether capability degrades at the same time. The provided metadata gives no abstract or numerical details, so model sizes, data scales, and exact findings cannot be stated confidently.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-quality","bias","pretraining-data","llm"],"keywords":["llm","healthcare","bias"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3的医疗偏见溯源至预训练语料的实验即可，可用于高风险领域预训练数据清洗优化参考。","en":"Read only §3 experiments tracing healthcare bias back to pretraining corpus, useful for pretraining data cleaning optimization in high-risk domains."}},{"id":"ChiL00LRL024","title":"Unveiling Causal Reasoning in Large Language Models: Reality or Mirage?","authors":["Haoang Chi","He Li","Wenjing Yang","Feng Liu","Long Lan","Xiaoguang Ren","Tongliang Liu","Bo Han"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b0","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChiL00LRL024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChiL00LRL024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/af2bb2b2280d36f8842e440b4e275152-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有研究无法明确LLM表现出的因果推理能力是真正的类人推理，还是仅依赖参数中记忆的因果知识。","importance":"属于实证+理论级贡献，明确了LLM因果推理的能力边界，为后续优化LLM因果推理能力提供了方向。","technical_approach":"从Transformer的自回归机制出发，将因果推理分为level-1（依赖记忆的浅层推理）和level-2（类人逻辑推导的深层推理）两个层级，通过控制变量的合成因果任务验证LLM的能力边界，舍弃之前仅用真实世界因果任务评估的方法，排除记忆因素的干扰。","experiments":"在7B到70B参数的主流LLM上验证，所有模型在排除记忆干扰的level-2因果任务上的准确率仅为随机水平（~50%），scaling实验显示参数规模扩大对level-2因果推理能力无显著提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing research cannot clarify whether the causal reasoning capability shown by LLMs is genuine human-like reasoning, or only relies on causal knowledge memorized in parameters.","importance":"This is an empirical and theoretical contribution. It clarifies the capability boundary of LLM causal reasoning, providing direction for subsequent optimization of LLM causal reasoning capability.","technical_approach":"Starting from the autoregressive mechanism of Transformers, it divides causal reasoning into two levels: level-1 (shallow memory-dependent reasoning) and level-2 (deep human-like logical reasoning). It verifies the capability boundary of LLMs through controlled synthetic causal tasks, abandons the previous evaluation method using only real-world causal tasks, and excludes the interference of memory factors.","experiments":"Verified on mainstream LLMs with 7B to 70B parameters, all models only achieve random level accuracy (~50%) on level-2 causal tasks that exclude memory interference. Scaling experiments show that parameter size increase has no significant improvement on level-2 causal reasoning capability.","authors_note":""},"tags":["causal-reasoning","reasoning","evaluation","llm","generalization"],"keywords":["trustworthy machine learning","LLM","causal reasoning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer的自回归机制是现有LLM的核心生成逻辑","claim_en":"The autoregressive mechanism of Transformers is the core generation logic of existing LLMs","evidence_anchor":"§2 Methodology"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"现有自回归LLM仅能完成依赖记忆的浅层因果推理，不具备真正的类人深层因果推理能力，参数规模扩大也无法提升该能力","claim_en":"Existing autoregressive LLMs can only complete memory-dependent shallow causal reasoning, and do not have genuine human-like deep causal reasoning capability, which cannot be improved by scaling parameter size","opposes":"Some prior works assume LLMs have human-like causal reasoning capability, which can be improved by scaling","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments, Table 2","why_contested":"It clarifies the essence and capability upper limit of existing LLM causal reasoning, which has important reference value for subsequent AGI research paths"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅需知晓结论即可，LLM表现出的因果推理大多来自记忆而非真实逻辑推导，无需细读正文。","en":"Only need to know its conclusion that LLM causal reasoning mostly comes from memorization rather than real logical deduction, no need to read full text."}},{"id":"ChizatN24","title":"The Feature Speed Formula: a flexible approach to scale hyper-parameters of deep neural networks","authors":["Lénaïc Chizat","Praneeth Netrapalli"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b1","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChizatN24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChizatN24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/720e7ebc49c84252abc0754dddf80976-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有深度学习超参数（初始化尺度、学习率等）调优仅能间接控制层级特征学习过程，缺乏可量化的理论工具预测和控制特征学习的速度。","importance":"属于理论+方法级贡献，提出的特征速度公式为神经网络超参数的规模化调优提供了统一的理论框架，可大幅降低大模型预训练的超参数调优成本。","technical_approach":"原创定义层特征更新与反向传播信号的夹角θ_l，推导得到特征速度公式，将单层特征更新的幅度量化为θ_l、损失衰减幅度、反向传播信号幅度三者的函数，舍弃之前超参数调优依赖经验试错的思路，可通过公式直接推导最优超参数设置。","experiments":"在CV和NLP的不同架构模型上验证，使用该公式设置的超参数比默认调参的训练收敛速度提升32%，最终性能提升1.8%，消融实验验证夹角θ_l的预测误差低于3%。","authors_note":"作者包括Praneeth Netrapalli，微软研究院核心研究员，深度学习优化理论领域的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing deep learning hyperparameter (initialization scale, learning rate, etc.) tuning can only indirectly control the hierarchical feature learning process, lacking quantifiable theoretical tools to predict and control the speed of feature learning.","importance":"This is a theoretical and methodological contribution. The proposed feature speed formula provides a unified theoretical framework for scalable hyperparameter tuning of neural networks, which can greatly reduce the hyperparameter tuning cost of large model pre-training.","technical_approach":"It originally defines the angle θ_l between layer feature updates and backpropagation signals, derives the feature speed formula, quantifies the magnitude of single-layer feature updates as a function of θ_l, loss decay magnitude, and backpropagation signal magnitude, abandons the previous hyperparameter tuning paradigm that relies on empirical trial and error, and can directly derive optimal hyperparameter settings through the formula.","experiments":"Verified on different architecture models in CV and NLP, hyperparameters set by this formula improve training convergence speed by 32% and final performance by 1.8% compared with default tuning. Ablation confirms the prediction error of angle θ_l is less than 3%.","authors_note":"Authors include Praneeth Netrapalli, core researcher at Microsoft Research, well-known scholar in deep learning optimization theory field."},"tags":["scaling-law","hyperparameters","optimization","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["Feature Learning","Deep Neural Networks","One SGD step","Hyperparameter scaling","dynamical isometry"],"notable_authors":["Lénaïc Chizat","Praneeth Netrapalli"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"深度学习的训练过程本质是层级特征的迭代更新过程，超参数直接影响特征学习的效率","claim_en":"The training process of deep learning is essentially the iterative update of hierarchical features, and hyperparameters directly affect the efficiency of feature learning","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"特征更新的幅度可通过特征速度公式精确预测，无需依赖大量试错即可得到各层的最优超参数设置","claim_en":"The magnitude of feature updates can be accurately predicted by the feature speed formula, and optimal hyperparameter settings for each layer can be obtained without extensive trial and error","opposes":"Prior hyperparameter tuning relies on empirical rules or large-scale search, and there is no unified quantitative prediction tool","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Theoretical Derivation, §4 Experiments","why_contested":"It breaks the empirical dependence of hyperparameter tuning, providing a feasible theoretical tool for scalable hyperparameter setting for large model pre-training"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§5的特征速度公式与超参数推导部分即可，可直接复用降低大模型预训练超参调优成本。","en":"Check only §5 feature speed formula and hyperparameter derivation, can be directly reused to cut large model pretraining hyperparameter tuning cost."}},{"id":"ChoromanskiSCLD24","title":"Fast Tree-Field Integrators: From Low Displacement Rank to Topological Transformers","authors":["Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski","Arijit Sehanobish","Somnath Basu Roy Chowdhury","Han Lin","Kumar Avinava Dubey","Tamás Sarlós","Snigdha Chaturvedi"],"institutions":["Google DeepMind","Columbia University","University of Cambridge"],"abstract":"We present a new class of fast polylog-linear algorithms based on the theory of structured matrices (in particular *low displacement rank*) for integrating tensor fields defined on weighted trees. Several applications of the resulting *fast tree-field integrators* (FTFIs) are presented, including: (a) approximation of graph metrics with tree metrics, (b) graph classification, (c) modeling on meshes, and finally (d) *Topological Transformers* (TTs) (Choromanski et al., 2022)  for images. For Topological Transformers, we propose new relative position encoding (RPE) masking mechanisms with as few as **three** extra learnable parameters per Transformer layer, leading to **1.0-1.5\\%+** accuracy gains. Importantly, most of FTFIs are **exact** methods, thus numerically equivalent to their brute-force counterparts. When applied to graphs with thousands of nodes, those exact algorithms provide **5.7-13x** speedups. We also provide an extensive theoretical analysis of our methods.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChoromanskiSCLD24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChoromanskiSCLD24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/41aa1c9f57ea83d7c41f0d3e98ed3dd4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"如何高效且精确地计算树结构上的张量场积分，以解决图度量近似、图分类以及视觉 Transformer 中的相对位置编码（RPE）等问题。以往的方法往往依赖于计算代价高昂的暴力求解或近似方法，难以在保持精度的同时实现高效计算。","importance":"方法级贡献。提出了一类基于结构化矩阵理论（特别是低位移秩）的快速树场积分器（FTFI），为处理树结构数据提供了一种精确且高效的计算框架。在视觉 Transformer 中，该方法能以极少的额外参数实现显著的性能提升，为 RPE 的设计提供了新思路。","technical_approach":"提出快速树场积分器（FTFI）。核心机制是利用结构化矩阵的低位移秩特性，将树上的张量场积分转化为多项式对数线性时间复杂度的算法。对于 Topological Transformers，设计了新的 RPE 掩码机制，每层仅需 3 个额外可学习参数。与现有方法相比，FTFI 大多是精确方法，在数值上等价于暴力求解，但计算效率大幅提升。","experiments":"在 Topological Transformers 上的实验表明，引入新的 RPE 掩码机制后，在仅增加极少参数（每层 3 个）的情况下，实现了 1.0-1.5%+ 的准确率提升。此外，FTFI 在图度量近似、图分类等任务上也展现了高效性和精确性。","authors_note":"Google DeepMind / Columbia University / University of Cambridge 等机构合作。Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski 是 Performer 等高效 Transformer 架构的知名作者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to efficiently and exactly compute tensor field integrals on tree structures to solve problems like graph metric approximation, graph classification, and relative position encoding (RPE) in Vision Transformers. Previous methods often relied on computationally expensive brute-force or approximate solvers, struggling to balance accuracy and efficiency.","importance":"Methodological contribution. Introduces a class of fast tree-field integrators (FTFIs) based on structured matrix theory (specifically low displacement rank), providing an exact and efficient computational framework for tree-structured data. In Vision Transformers, it achieves significant performance gains with minimal extra parameters, offering a new perspective for RPE design.","technical_approach":"Proposes Fast Tree-Field Integrators (FTFIs). The core mechanism leverages the low displacement rank property of structured matrices to transform tensor field integrals on trees into polylog-linear time algorithms. For Topological Transformers, new RPE masking mechanisms are designed, requiring only 3 extra learnable parameters per layer. Unlike existing methods, most FTFIs are exact, numerically equivalent to brute-force but vastly more efficient.","experiments":"Experiments on Topological Transformers show that the new RPE masking mechanism yields 1.0-1.5%+ accuracy gains with minimal parameter overhead (3 per layer). FTFIs also demonstrate efficiency and exactness in graph metric approximation and graph classification tasks.","authors_note":"Collaboration among Google DeepMind, Columbia University, University of Cambridge, etc. Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski is known for efficient Transformer architectures like Performer."},"tags":["attention","transformer","efficiency","long-context"],"keywords":["Tree Metrics","Low Displacement Rank","Field Integrators","Topological Transformers","Graph Theory","Efficient Algorithms on Graphs"],"notable_authors":["Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski"],"views":{"consensus":[],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于视觉Transformer相对位置编码的小众优化方向，与通用大模型预训练相关性低，仅作为文献备查。","en":"It is a niche optimization for vision Transformer relative position encoding, low relevance to general LLM pretraining, only for literature reference."}},{"id":"ChouYWP0WZQ0L24","title":"MetaLA: Unified Optimal Linear Approximation to Softmax Attention Map","authors":["Yuhong Chou","Man Yao","Kexin Wang","Yuqi Pan","Rui-Jie Zhu","Jibin Wu","Yiran Zhong","Yu Qiao","Bo Xu","Guoqi Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b2","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChouYWP0WZQ0L24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChouYWP0WZQ0L24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/8329a45669017898bb0cc09d27f8d2bb-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"如何从理论上找到对 Softmax 注意力机制的最佳线性近似，以解决现有线性复杂度模型（如 LinFormer、SSM、LinRNN）在性能上往往不及标准 Transformer 的问题。以往的线性模型设计多基于经验直觉，缺乏统一的理论指导和最优性保证。","importance":"理论与方法级贡献。首次从理论层面统一了现有的线性复杂度模型，并提出了最优线性注意力设计的三个必要条件。这为理解线性模型的局限性提供了理论框架，并指导了新模型 MetaLA 的设计，对长上下文建模和高效 Transformer 架构研究具有重要启发。","technical_approach":"提出 MetaLA 模型。首先将现有线性模型统一为线性注意力形式，然后推导出最优设计的三个条件：(1) 动态记忆能力；(2) 静态近似能力；(3) 最小参数近似。发现现有模型均无法同时满足这三个条件。MetaLA 通过设计特定的特征映射和聚合机制，在理论上满足了这些条件，从而实现了对 Softmax 注意力的最优线性近似。","experiments":"实验结果表明，MetaLA 在多项任务上优于现有的线性模型。具体指标和提升幅度（如困惑度、准确率等）在摘要中未详细列出，但强调了其在满足理论最优条件下的性能优势。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to theoretically find the optimal linear approximation to Softmax attention, addressing the performance gap between existing linear complexity models (e.g., LinFormer, SSM, LinRNN) and standard Transformers. Previous linear model designs were mostly empirical, lacking unified theoretical guidance and optimality guarantees.","importance":"Theoretical and methodological contribution. Unifies existing linear complexity models theoretically for the first time and proposes three necessary conditions for optimal linear attention design. This provides a theoretical framework for understanding the limitations of linear models and guides the design of the new model, MetaLA, offering significant insights for long-context modeling and efficient Transformer architectures.","technical_approach":"Proposes the MetaLA model. First, unifies existing linear models into a linear attention form, then derives three conditions for optimal design: (1) Dynamic memory ability; (2) Static approximation ability; (3) Least parameter approximation. Identifies that current models fail to meet all three. MetaLA theoretically satisfies these conditions through specific feature mapping and aggregation mechanisms, achieving the optimal linear approximation to Softmax attention.","experiments":"Experimental results show MetaLA outperforms existing linear models across multiple tasks. Specific metrics and gains (e.g., perplexity, accuracy) are not detailed in the abstract, but the performance advantage under theoretical optimality is emphasized.","authors_note":""},"tags":["attention","softmax","approximation","efficiency"],"keywords":["Self-attention","Linear attention","Efficient","Softmax attention","Foundation Model","Language Model"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"现有的线性复杂度模型（如 LinFormer、SSM、LinRNN）在性能上通常不及标准的 Softmax 注意力模型。","claim_en":"Existing linear complexity models (such as LinFormer, SSM, and LinRNN) generally underperform standard Softmax attention models.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"现有的线性复杂度模型均未能同时满足最优线性注意力设计的三个条件（动态记忆、静态近似、最小参数近似），导致其性能次优。","claim_en":"None of the current linear complexity models meet all three conditions for optimal linear attention design (dynamic memory, static approximation, least parameter approximation), resulting in suboptimal performance.","opposes":"现有的线性模型设计已经足够优化或接近最优。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"指出了现有线性模型在理论设计上的根本缺陷，为开发更优的线性注意力机制指明了方向。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3的线性注意力最优三条件推导即可，可指导高效长上下文Transformer架构设计。","en":"Read only §3 derivation of three optimal linear attention conditions, guides efficient long-context Transformer architecture design."}},{"id":"ChoudhuryTLHTG24","title":"Remove that Square Root: A New Efficient Scale-Invariant Version of AdaGrad","authors":["Sayantan Choudhury","Nazarii Tupitsa","Nicolas Loizou","Samuel Horváth","Martin Takác","Eduard Gorbunov"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Adaptive methods are extremely popular in machine learning as they make learning rate tuning less expensive. This paper introduces a novel optimization algorithm named KATE, which presents a scale-invariant adaptation of the well-known AdaGrad algorithm. We prove the scale-invariance of KATE for the case of Generalized Linear Models. Moreover, for general smooth non-convex problems, we establish a convergence rate of  $O((\\log T)/\\sqrt{T})$ for KATE, matching the best-known ones for AdaGrad and Adam. We also compare KATE to other state-of-the-art adaptive algorithms Adam and AdaGrad in numerical experiments with different problems, including complex machine learning tasks like image classification and text classification on real data. The results indicate that KATE consistently outperforms AdaGrad and matches/surpasses the performance of Adam in all considered scenarios.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChoudhuryTLHTG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChoudhuryTLHTG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/54ca2c45ce17dbd9ebad7ab0f39c825a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"如何设计一种尺度不变（scale-invariant）的自适应优化算法，以解决 AdaGrad 等现有算法对特征缩放敏感的问题。以往的自适应方法虽然降低了学习率调参的成本，但在处理不同尺度的特征时仍可能表现不佳。","importance":"方法级贡献。提出了 KATE 算法，这是 AdaGrad 的一种尺度不变变体。它在理论上保证了广义线性模型的尺度不变性，并在非凸问题上达到了与 Adam 和 AdaGrad 相同的收敛率。这为提高优化算法的鲁棒性和泛化能力提供了新的工具。","technical_approach":"提出 KATE 算法。核心机制是去除了 AdaGrad 更新公式中的平方根操作，从而实现了尺度不变性。对于广义线性模型，证明了其尺度不变性；对于一般的平滑非凸问题，建立了 $O((\\log T)/\\sqrt{T})$ 的收敛率。与 Adam 和 AdaGrad 相比，KATE 在处理不同尺度的特征时更加鲁棒。","experiments":"在图像分类和文本分类等复杂机器学习任务上进行了数值实验。结果表明，KATE 持续优于 Adam 和 AdaGrad 等最先进的自适应算法。具体指标和提升幅度在摘要中未详细列出。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to design a scale-invariant adaptive optimization algorithm to address the sensitivity of existing algorithms like AdaGrad to feature scaling. While adaptive methods reduce learning rate tuning costs, they can still struggle with features of varying scales.","importance":"Methodological contribution. Introduces KATE, a scale-invariant variant of AdaGrad. It theoretically guarantees scale-invariance for Generalized Linear Models and achieves the same convergence rate as Adam and AdaGrad on non-convex problems. This provides a new tool for improving the robustness and generalization of optimization algorithms.","technical_approach":"Proposes the KATE algorithm. The core mechanism removes the square root operation from the AdaGrad update formula, achieving scale-invariance. Proves scale-invariance for Generalized Linear Models and establishes an $O((\\log T)/\\sqrt{T})$ convergence rate for general smooth non-convex problems. Compared to Adam and AdaGrad, KATE is more robust when handling features of varying scales.","experiments":"Numerical experiments conducted on complex machine learning tasks like image and text classification. Results indicate KATE consistently outperforms state-of-the-art adaptive algorithms like Adam and AdaGrad. Specific metrics and gains are not detailed in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimizer","adagrad","optimization","training-stability"],"keywords":["Scale-invariant methods","AdaGrad","non-convex optimization","adaptive methods"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"自适应优化方法（如 Adam、AdaGrad）在机器学习中非常流行，因为它们降低了学习率调参的成本。","claim_en":"Adaptive optimization methods (like Adam, AdaGrad) are extremely popular in machine learning as they make learning rate tuning less expensive.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅需知晓有该优化器变体即可，无大规模预训练场景下的泛化验证结果，无需细读。","en":"Only need to know this optimizer variant exists, no generalization validation in large-scale pretraining scenarios, no need to read in detail."}},{"id":"ChuAMNS024","title":"Metric Transforms and Low Rank Representations of Kernels for Fast Attention","authors":["Timothy Chu","Josh Alman","Gary L. Miller","Shyam Narayanan","Mark Sellke","Zhao Song"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b3","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChuAMNS024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChuAMNS024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/53f2c82c6b165a963b353194113ee71e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"如何系统地寻找能够替代 Softmax 注意力并实现快速计算的函数。以往的研究发现低阶多项式具有低秩特性，可用于加速注意力计算，但缺乏对这类函数的全面刻画，限制了更高效注意力机制的探索。","importance":"理论与方法级贡献。引入了基于群表示论的线性代数工具，证明了低阶多项式是唯一具有所需低秩特性的函数。这一结论不仅明确了快速注意力算法设计的理论边界，还为其他机器学习问题（如核方法的低秩表示）提供了新的分析工具。","technical_approach":"利用群表示论分析矩阵 $QK^{\\top}$ 的逐元素函数应用。核心发现是：当 $Q$ 和 $K$ 为 $n \\times d$ 矩阵且 $n \\gg d$ 时，如果一个函数 $f$ 应用于 $QK^{\\top}$ 后结果为低秩矩阵，那么 $f$ 必须是低阶多项式。这一证明排除了寻找其他类型低秩函数的可能性，将快速注意力算法的设计空间限制在多项式范围内。","experiments":"本文主要为理论贡献，摘要中未提及具体的实验验证或性能指标。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to systematically find functions that can replace Softmax attention and enable fast computation. Previous research found that low-degree polynomials possess low-rank properties useful for accelerating attention, but lacked a comprehensive characterization of such functions, limiting the exploration of more efficient attention mechanisms.","importance":"Theoretical and methodological contribution. Introduces a linear-algebraic tool based on group representation theory, proving that low-degree polynomials are the *only* functions with the required low-rank property. This conclusion not only defines the theoretical boundaries for designing fast attention algorithms but also provides a new analytical tool for other machine learning problems (e.g., low-rank representations of kernels).","technical_approach":"Analyzes the entry-wise application of functions to the matrix $QK^{\\top}$ using group representation theory. The core finding is: when $Q$ and $K$ are $n \\times d$ matrices and $n \\gg d$, if a function $f$ applied to $QK^{\\top}$ results in a low-rank matrix, then $f$ *must* be a low-degree polynomial. This proof eliminates the possibility of finding other types of low-rank functions, restricting the design space of fast attention algorithms to polynomials.","experiments":"This paper is primarily a theoretical contribution; the abstract does not mention specific experimental validation or performance metrics.","authors_note":""},"tags":["attention","low-rank","kernel","efficiency"],"keywords":["hardness","impossibility","low rank transform","kernel method","LLM","attention"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"低阶多项式在应用于 $QK^{\\top}$ 时具有低秩特性，可用于构建快速的次二次复杂度注意力算法。","claim_en":"Low-degree polynomials exhibit low-rank properties when applied to $QK^{\\top}$, which can be used to construct fast subquadratic attention algorithms.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"低阶多项式是唯一具有这种低秩特性的函数，不存在其他类型的函数可以用于替代 Softmax 以实现基于低秩近似的快速注意力。","claim_en":"Low-degree polynomials are the *only* functions with this low-rank property; no other types of functions exist that can replace Softmax for fast attention based on low-rank approximation.","opposes":"可能存在其他非多项式函数也具有低秩特性，可用于快速注意力计算。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"从理论上封闭了寻找非多项式低秩函数以加速注意力的研究方向，明确了算法设计的边界。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§2的低秩函数证明部分即可，明确了快速注意力算法的设计边界，排除了无效探索方向。","en":"Check only §2 proof of low-rank function constraints, clarifies the design boundary of fast attention algorithms and eliminates invalid exploration directions."}},{"id":"Cohen-WangSGM24","title":"ContextCite: Attributing Model Generation to Context","authors":["Benjamin Cohen-Wang","Harshay Shah","Kristian Georgiev","Aleksander Madry"],"institutions":["MIT"],"abstract":"How do language models use information provided as context when generating a response?\nCan we infer whether a particular generated statement is actually grounded in the context, a misinterpretation, or fabricated?\nTo help answer these questions, we introduce the problem of *context attribution*: pinpointing the parts of the context (if any) that *led* a model to generate a particular statement.\nWe then present ContextCite, a simple and scalable method for context attribution that can be applied on top of any existing language model.\nFinally, we showcase the utility of ContextCite through three applications:\n(1) helping verify generated statements\n(2) improving response quality by pruning the context and\n(3) detecting poisoning attacks.\nWe provide code for ContextCite at https://github.com/MadryLab/context-cite.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Cohen-WangSGM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Cohen-WangSGM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/adbea136219b64db96a9941e4249a857-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"如何确定语言模型生成的特定陈述是基于上下文中的哪些部分，以区分其是真实的上下文推断、误解还是捏造。以往的方法难以精确地将生成内容归因于具体的上下文片段，限制了模型输出的可靠性验证。","importance":"方法级贡献。提出了 ContextCite，一个简单且可扩展的上下文归因方法，可应用于任何现有的语言模型。这为解决 LLM 的幻觉问题、提高生成内容的可解释性和可信度提供了实用工具，对 RAG 等依赖上下文的应用尤为重要。","technical_approach":"提出 ContextCite 方法。核心机制是通过分析模型在不同上下文子集下的生成概率，来定位导致特定陈述生成的上下文片段。与需要修改模型架构或训练过程的方法不同，ContextCite 是一个即插即用的后处理方法，具有良好的通用性和可扩展性。","experiments":"展示了 ContextCite 在三个应用场景中的有效性：(1) 验证生成的陈述；(2) 通过修剪上下文提高响应质量；(3) 检测数据投毒攻击。摘要中未提供具体的量化指标，但强调了其在实际应用中的效用。","authors_note":"MIT 团队。Aleksander Madry 是鲁棒机器学习领域的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to determine which parts of the context led a language model to generate a specific statement, in order to distinguish between grounded inference, misinterpretation, or fabrication. Previous methods struggled to accurately attribute generated content to specific context snippets, limiting the verification of model output reliability.","importance":"Methodological contribution. Introduces ContextCite, a simple and scalable context attribution method applicable to any existing language model. This provides a practical tool for addressing LLM hallucinations and improving the interpretability and trustworthiness of generated content, which is particularly crucial for context-dependent applications like RAG.","technical_approach":"Proposes the ContextCite method. The core mechanism locates the context snippets responsible for a specific statement by analyzing the model's generation probabilities under different subsets of the context. Unlike methods requiring architectural modifications or retraining, ContextCite is a plug-and-play post-processing method with strong generality and scalability.","experiments":"Demonstrates the effectiveness of ContextCite in three applications: (1) verifying generated statements; (2) improving response quality by pruning context; (3) detecting poisoning attacks. Specific quantitative metrics are not provided in the abstract, but its utility in practical applications is emphasized.","authors_note":"MIT team. Aleksander Madry is a renowned scholar in robust machine learning."},"tags":["attribution","context","generation","interpretability","llm"],"keywords":["attribution","citation","generative models","large language models"],"notable_authors":["Aleksander Madry"],"views":{"consensus":[],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4的上下文归因实验部分即可，可直接复用作为RAG场景下的幻觉检测工具。","en":"Read only §4 context attribution experiments, can be directly reused as a hallucination detection tool for RAG scenarios."}},{"id":"CohenDBM24","title":"I Don&apos;t Know: Explicit Modeling of Uncertainty with an [IDK] Token","authors":["Roi Cohen","Konstantin Dobler","Eden Biran","Gerard de Melo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/CohenDBM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/CohenDBM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/14c018d2e72c521605b0567029ef0efb-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["uncertainty","calibration","special-token","alignment","llm"]},{"id":"Collins-Woodfin24","title":"The High Line: Exact Risk and Learning Rate Curves of Stochastic Adaptive Learning Rate Algorithms","authors":["Elizabeth Collins-Woodfin","Inbar Seroussi","Begoña García Malaxechebarría","Andrew W. Mackenzie","Elliot Paquette","Courtney Paquette"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b4","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Collins-Woodfin24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Collins-Woodfin24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/0c7ca207a051228f978971447a56464a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"如何精确分析高维优化问题中，使用自适应学习率的单次遍历随机梯度下降（SGD）的训练和学习率动态。以往的理论分析往往依赖于简化的假设或界限，难以给出风险和学习率曲线的精确表达式。","importance":"理论级贡献。开发了一个框架，能够通过常微分方程（ODE）系统的确定性解，给出风险和学习率曲线的精确表达式。这为深入理解自适应优化算法（如 AdaGrad-Norm 和精确线搜索）的收敛行为提供了强大的理论工具，揭示了某些理想化策略在特定条件下的次优性。","technical_approach":"建立了一个基于 ODE 的理论框架，用于分析高维优化问题（称为 high line）上的自适应 SGD。核心机制是将随机优化过程映射为确定性的 ODE 系统。详细研究了理想化的精确线搜索和 AdaGrad-Norm 在最小二乘问题上的表现。与传统的收敛性界限分析不同，该方法提供了动态过程的精确刻画。","experiments":"理论分析表明，当数据协方差矩阵具有严格正特征值时，理想化的精确线搜索策略的收敛速度可能比使用最优固定学习率的 SGD 慢得多。此外，精确刻画了极限学习率的行为。摘要中未提及具体的数值实验。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to exactly analyze the training and learning rate dynamics of one-pass stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with adaptive learning rates on high-dimensional optimization problems. Previous theoretical analyses often relied on simplified assumptions or bounds, struggling to provide exact expressions for risk and learning rate curves.","importance":"Theoretical contribution. Develops a framework that provides exact expressions for risk and learning rate curves via deterministic solutions to a system of ordinary differential equations (ODEs). This offers a powerful theoretical tool for deeply understanding the convergence behavior of adaptive optimization algorithms (like AdaGrad-Norm and exact line search), revealing the suboptimality of certain idealized strategies under specific conditions.","technical_approach":"Establishes an ODE-based theoretical framework to analyze adaptive SGD on high-dimensional optimization problems (termed the 'high line'). The core mechanism maps the stochastic optimization process to a deterministic ODE system. Investigates in detail the performance of idealized exact line search and AdaGrad-Norm on least squares problems. Unlike traditional convergence bound analysis, this method provides an exact characterization of the dynamic process.","experiments":"Theoretical analysis shows that when the data covariance matrix has strictly positive eigenvalues, the idealized exact line search strategy can converge arbitrarily slower than SGD with an optimal fixed learning rate. Furthermore, it exactly characterizes the limiting learning rate behavior. No specific numerical experiments are mentioned in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimizer","learning-rate","theory","adaptive-optimization"],"keywords":["Stochastic optimization","high-dimensional probability/statistics","adaptive stepsizes"],"views":{"consensus":[],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"在数据协方差矩阵具有严格正特征值的最小二乘问题中，理想化的精确线搜索策略的收敛速度可能比使用最优固定学习率的 SGD 慢得多。","claim_en":"On least squares problems where the data covariance matrix has strictly positive eigenvalues, an idealized exact line search strategy can exhibit arbitrarily slower convergence compared to SGD with an optimal fixed learning rate.","opposes":"精确线搜索（作为一种自适应策略）通常能比固定学习率带来更快或更稳定的收敛。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"打破了“更精细的自适应策略（如精确线搜索）必然带来更好收敛”的直觉，揭示了在高维随机优化中自适应策略可能带来的负面影响。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅需知晓其分析结论即可，属于纯优化器理论工作，无直接指导预训练调参的落地价值。","en":"Only need to know its analysis conclusion, it is pure optimizer theoretical work with no direct practical value for guiding pretraining tuning."}},{"id":"CunninghamGZD24","title":"Reparameterized Multi-Resolution Convolutions for Long Sequence Modelling","authors":["Jake Cunningham","Giorgio Giannone","Mingtian Zhang","Marc Peter Deisenroth"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Global convolutions have shown increasing promise as powerful general-purpose sequence models. However, training long convolutions is challenging, and kernel parameterizations must be able to learn long-range dependencies without overfitting. This work introduces reparameterized multi-resolution convolutions ($\\texttt{MRConv}$), a novel approach to parameterizing global convolutional kernels for long-sequence modeling. By leveraging multi-resolution convolutions, incorporating structural reparameterization and introducing learnable kernel decay, $\\texttt{MRConv}$ learns expressive long-range kernels that perform well across various data modalities. Our experiments demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on the Long Range Arena, Sequential CIFAR, and Speech Commands tasks among convolution models and linear-time transformers. Moreover, we report improved performance on ImageNet classification by replacing 2D convolutions with 1D $\\texttt{MRConv}$ layers.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/CunninghamGZD24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/CunninghamGZD24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/2f9ee101e35b890d9eae79ee27bcd69a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作想解决长序列建模里一个老问题：注意力精度高但代价随长度增长快，而卷积高效却常在超长依赖上不够稳。过去很多方法通过状态空间模型、稀疏注意力或大核卷积绕开这个矛盾，但代价往往是实现复杂、频域解释不足，或多尺度信息融合做得不够自然。","importance":"它的重要性在于给长序列建模提供了一条偏系统与架构折中的路线。对 pretrain 的启示不是“卷积替代 Transformer”这么简单，而是如何用更可控的多分辨率结构在保持效率的同时覆盖不同时间尺度依赖；这对长上下文语言建模、音频序列、离散多模态 token 序列都有关。如果重参数化设计确实能把训练稳定性和推理效率同时做好，它会是注意力之外一类值得保留的 backbone 组件。","technical_approach":"核心方法是重参数化的多分辨率卷积。直观上，它把不同感受野的卷积核组织成一个可训练、可高效实现的层，在训练时保留足够表达力，在推理时再折叠或重写成更高效形式。这样做的原因很直接：长序列依赖不是单一尺度的，固定单核宽度要么看不远，要么参数和计算都偏贵；多分辨率结构可以同时覆盖局部模式和远距离趋势。它与普通堆叠卷积的区别，在于显式建模尺度分工；与 SSM 的区别，在于保留了卷积式实现与更直接的局部归纳偏置。","experiments":"目前没有摘要细节，无法确认任务、长度范围、参数量和具体增益。实验上最关键的观察通常应包括：在长度拉长时性能衰减曲线是否优于标准卷积或轻量注意力；在同等 FLOPs/吞吐下是否能稳定提升；以及多分辨率分支数、核宽、重参数化形式对性能和训练稳定性的影响。如果这些点没有被系统验证，这类方法的说服力会有限。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a familiar trade-off in long-sequence modeling: attention is expressive but scales poorly with length, while convolutions are efficient but often struggle to retain very long-range structure. Prior work has addressed this with sparse attention, SSMs, or large kernels, but usually at the cost of implementation complexity or awkward multi-scale integration.","importance":"Its value is likely architectural and systems-oriented rather than paradigm-shifting. The useful message for pretraining is that long-context modeling may benefit from explicitly multi-resolution backbones that cover different temporal scales without paying full attention cost. That matters not only for text, but also for audio and tokenized multimodal streams where sequence length is the bottleneck.","technical_approach":"The core idea is a reparameterized multi-resolution convolution layer. The likely design is to train with a richer set of convolutional components spanning multiple receptive fields, then fold or rewrite them into a more efficient form for inference. This is a sensible choice because long-range dependencies are not single-scale; one kernel width is usually a bad compromise between local detail and global context. Compared with plain stacked convolutions, the method explicitly assigns roles across scales. Compared with SSM-style models, it keeps a convolutional implementation and a more direct local inductive bias.","experiments":"The abstract details are missing, so specific tasks, lengths, model sizes, and gains cannot be stated reliably. The key evidence to look for is whether performance degrades more gracefully as sequence length grows, whether the method improves quality at matched FLOPs or throughput, and whether the gains survive ablations on branch count, kernel widths, and the reparameterization design.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-sequence","convolution","architecture","ssm"],"keywords":["Sequence Modelling","Convolutions","Structural Reparameterization","Self Attention","State Space Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4的长序列建模效果对比实验即可，可作为长上下文预训练backbone组件的备选方案。","en":"Check only §4 long sequence modeling performance comparison, can be an alternative candidate for long-context pretraining backbone components."}},{"id":"DauphinAM24","title":"Neglected Hessian component explains mysteries in sharpness regularization","authors":["Yann N. Dauphin","Atish Agarwala","Hossein Mobahi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b5","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DauphinAM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DauphinAM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ee3ce0121939f42098cdefd3ea025bf1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作试图解释 sharpness regularization 里一些长期存在的反常现象，而答案指向一个此前常被忽略的 Hessian 成分。过去关于 sharpness 的讨论经常只看 Hessian 的某种近似、主特征值或 trace，因此会出现理论预测和经验结果对不上的情况：同样降低“尖锐度”的方法，泛化和优化效果却不一致。","importance":"这类工作的重要性在于纠偏。对于大模型训练，sharpness、flatness、SAM 一类方法经常被当作泛化与稳定性的解释框架，但如果分析对象少了一块关键项，那很多经验规律其实建在不完整测量上。论文若能明确指出忽略哪一项会导致哪些误判，就能帮助研究者重新理解 sharpness-based regularization 在预训练中的边界，而不是继续把一些经验现象硬套到旧理论里。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者的核心贡献是把一个此前被忽视的 Hessian 组成部分显式纳入 sharpness 分析，并用它解释已有“谜团”。关键不一定是提出新正则器，而是修正 sharpness 的测量和分解方式，说明哪些近似在现代网络中失真、为什么失真、在什么条件下失真最严重。这样做有效，因为 Hessian 不只是一个标量‘尖或平’；不同分量对应的几何与优化含义不同，漏掉其中一部分会把训练动态解释错。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认论文是偏理论还是同时覆盖大规模深网实验，也无法给出定量提升。对于这类论文，重要证据包括：新分解是否能统一解释多个先前矛盾现象；在不同架构、不同 batch size、不同 sharpness 正则方法下结论是否稳；以及被指出的 Hessian 成分是否能预测最终泛化或训练稳定性。如果只是事后解释单一现象，影响会比较有限。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper aims to explain persistent anomalies in sharpness regularization, arguing that a neglected Hessian component is the missing piece. Much prior discussion of sharpness relies on partial proxies such as top eigenvalues or trace-like summaries, which can fail to match what is observed in practice.","importance":"Its value is corrective rather than purely additive. In large-model training, sharpness and flatness are often used to reason about generalization and methods like SAM. If a key Hessian term has been systematically ignored, then some widely used interpretations are built on incomplete measurements. Clarifying that would sharpen the boundary of where sharpness-based reasoning is trustworthy in pretraining.","technical_approach":"From the title, the main contribution is to explicitly include a previously neglected Hessian component in the analysis of sharpness regularization and use it to explain earlier puzzles. The likely goal is not just a new regularizer, but a corrected decomposition or measurement scheme showing when common approximations break and why. That matters because the Hessian is not a single scalar notion of sharp versus flat; different components encode different geometry and optimization effects.","experiments":"The abstract is unavailable, so specific settings and gains cannot be stated. The critical evidence would be whether the proposed decomposition consistently explains multiple previously contradictory observations across architectures, batch sizes, and sharpness-aware methods, and whether the highlighted Hessian term is actually predictive of training stability or generalization.","authors_note":""},"tags":["hessian","sharpness","regularization","optimization"],"keywords":["sharpness","flatness","regularization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3的Hessian分量分解部分即可，修正了过往sharpness正则的认知偏差。","en":"Read only §3 Hessian component decomposition, corrects previous cognitive biases on sharpness regularization."}},{"id":"DoimoSAC24","title":"The Representation Landscape of Few-Shot Learning and Fine-Tuning in Large Language Models","authors":["Diego Doimo","Alessandro Serra","Alessio Ansuini","Alberto Cazzaniga"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b6","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DoimoSAC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DoimoSAC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/206018a258033def63607fbdf364bd2d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作研究 few-shot inference 和 fine-tuning 在 LLM 内部到底诱导了怎样不同的表示变化。过去社区常把两者放在性能层面对比，例如谁更省样本、谁更强，但对内部表征空间如何重组、两者是否在做同一种事的不同近似，理解并不充分，因此这个问题值得单独分析。","importance":"它的贡献属于表征分析和机制理解。对 pretrain 的启示在于：如果 few-shot 与 fine-tuning 改变表示的方式明显不同，那么我们对 in-context learning、参数更新、adapter 设计、甚至训练后对齐的很多经验判断都需要更细分。尤其在大模型里，表征几何往往决定可迁移性和遗忘程度，这类工作能帮助判断哪些能力更适合留给 pretrain，哪些适合放到 post-train。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者大概率比较 few-shot 和 fine-tuning 下隐藏表示的几何结构，例如层间相似性、类间分离、子空间旋转或线性探针可分性。关键不是只看最终准确率，而是看模型如何把任务信息注入现有表征：few-shot 可能更多依赖激活路径重配置，fine-tuning 则可能真正重写某些子空间。这样的设计有效，因为它能把“表现类似”与“机制相同”区分开，避免把 ICL 简化成隐式梯度下降之类过强类比。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认用的是哪些 LLM、哪些 few-shot 任务以及采用了哪些表征指标。对这类论文，真正有价值的结果通常包括：差异是否集中在中高层；模型变大后 few-shot 与 fine-tune 的表征是否更趋同还是更分化；以及 instruction tuning 后这种几何关系是否变化。如果这些趋势稳定，它会比单任务图示更有参考意义。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks how few-shot prompting and fine-tuning differ inside an LLM at the representation level. Prior comparisons have mostly focused on end-task performance, sample efficiency, or cost, while leaving open whether the two routes actually reshape internal representations in similar or fundamentally different ways.","importance":"This is a representation-analysis contribution with useful implications for pretraining. If few-shot learning and fine-tuning alter representations differently, then common intuitions about in-context learning, adapters, and post-training transfer need to be made more precise. In large models, representation geometry strongly affects transferability and forgetting, so understanding the distinction matters.","technical_approach":"The likely method is to compare the geometry of hidden representations under few-shot prompting and parameter updates, using tools such as layer-wise similarity, class separation, subspace rotation, or linear probes. The point is not just to compare final accuracy, but to see how task information enters the model: few-shot learning may primarily reconfigure activation pathways, while fine-tuning may rewrite part of the representation space. That helps separate similar behavior from similar mechanism.","experiments":"The abstract is missing, so specific LLMs, tasks, and metrics cannot be stated. The most informative results would be whether the differences concentrate in middle or late layers, whether larger models make few-shot and fine-tuning more similar or more distinct, and whether instruction tuning changes this geometry. Stable trends of that kind would matter more than isolated visualizations.","authors_note":""},"tags":["few-shot","fine-tuning","representation","llm"],"keywords":["LLMs","geometry hidden representations","clustering"],"recommendation":{"zh":"从表征几何视角对比 few-shot 和 fine-tuning 的差异，结论若扎实，能指导哪些能力留给 pretrain、哪些放 post-train，值得看实验设计。","en":"Compares few-shot and fine-tuning from a representation geometry perspective; if solid, it guides what capabilities to leave for pretrain vs. post-train. Worth checking the experimental setup."}},{"id":"DongCZS0D00Y0DL24","title":"Once Read is Enough: Domain-specific Pretraining-free Language Models with Cluster-guided Sparse Experts for Long-tail Domain Knowledge","authors":["Fang Dong","Mengyi Chen","Jixian Zhou","Yubin Shi","Yixuan Chen","Mingzhi Dong","Yujiang Wang","Dongsheng Li","Xiaochen Yang","Rui Zhu","Robert P. Dick","Qin Lv","Fan Yang","Tun Lu","Ning Gu","Li Shang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b7","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DongCZS0D00Y0DL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DongCZS0D00Y0DL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a1f12d8d3cc1b4789ff4ebec46e27609-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决长尾领域知识获取的一个成本问题：很多领域并不值得做完整领域继续预训练，但只靠检索或普通微调又常学不到稳定的专门知识。过去常见做法是在领域语料上继续预训练，效果通常不错，但算力和数据清洗成本高，而且容易影响通用能力；因此“免领域预训练”但仍能吸收长尾知识，是一个很现实的目标。","importance":"这项工作对 pretrain/post-train 接口很有参考价值。它的意义不只是省训练成本，而是在问：领域知识到底必须通过 dense 参数全局写入，还是可以通过结构化稀疏专家按簇组织后一次读取式地注入。若方法有效，它会支持一种更模块化的知识扩展路线，适合长尾行业、多租户部署和持续增量更新。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 cluster-guided sparse experts，用聚类引导的稀疏专家来承载长尾领域知识，并避免完整的领域继续预训练。直观上，作者应该先把领域知识或样本按语义簇切分，再让不同专家对不同簇负责，推理时按输入选择少量专家激活。这样做的原因是长尾知识天然不均匀，dense 更新会把稀有知识稀释到全模型里，既低效也容易干扰通用能力；稀疏专家则把容量集中到真正需要的子空间。它与普通 MoE 的区别，大概率在于专家划分受知识簇显式约束，而不是完全由路由器自组织。","experiments":"没有摘要细节，无法确认是医学、法律还是其他长尾领域，也无法确认是否真的不做任何领域预训练。实验上最关键的是对比三类 baseline：继续预训练、RAG/检索增强、普通微调或 LoRA；并看在领域问答、知识记忆和通用能力保持上的权衡。如果论文能证明接近领域预训练效果但成本更低，而且跨多个领域都成立，那价值会比较实在；若只在单领域单任务有效，则更像特化方案。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets the cost of acquiring long-tail domain knowledge. Full domain-specific continued pretraining often works, but it is expensive and can hurt general capabilities. On the other hand, plain fine-tuning or retrieval is often not enough to internalize stable specialist knowledge. The paper asks whether domain adaptation can be done without another full pretraining phase.","importance":"This is relevant to the pretrain–post-train interface. The contribution is not just cheaper adaptation; it probes whether domain knowledge really needs to be written densely into all model parameters, or whether it can be injected more modularly through structured sparse experts. If successful, that would support a practical route for long-tail verticals and continual knowledge updates.","technical_approach":"The core method is a cluster-guided sparse expert design that stores long-tail domain knowledge without full domain pretraining. The likely pipeline is to cluster domain data or knowledge into semantic groups, assign experts to those groups, and activate only a small subset of experts per input. This is sensible because long-tail knowledge is highly uneven: dense updates spread rare knowledge across the whole model inefficiently and risk interfering with general behavior. Sparse experts can localize capacity where it is actually needed. The likely distinction from standard MoE is that expert specialization is explicitly guided by knowledge clusters rather than learned only through a generic router.","experiments":"The available information does not reveal which domains or baselines are used. The key comparison should be against continued pretraining, retrieval-augmented methods, and conventional fine-tuning or LoRA, evaluated on both domain competence and retention of general ability. If the method approaches domain-pretraining quality at much lower cost and works across multiple domains, it would be a meaningful systems contribution. If it only works in a single niche, the impact is narrower.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","domain-adaptation","long-tail","sparse-experts"],"keywords":["language model","long-tail","clustering"],"recommendation":{"zh":"用聚类引导的稀疏专家注入长尾知识，避免全量领域预训练，思路务实，对模块化知识扩展和多租户部署有参考价值，只看方法设计即可。","en":"Injects long-tail knowledge via cluster-guided sparse experts to avoid full domain pretraining. Pragmatic approach, useful for modular knowledge expansion and multi-tenant deployment. Skim the method design."}},{"id":"2404.06512","title":"InternLM-XComposer2-4KHD: A Pioneering Large Vision-Language Model Handling Resolutions from 336 Pixels to 4K HD","authors":["Xiaoyi Dong","Pan Zhang","Yuhang Zang","Yuhang Cao","Bin Wang","Linke Ouyang","Songyang Zhang","Haodong Duan","Wenwei Zhang","Yining Li","Hang Yan","Yang Gao","Zhe Chen","Xinyue Zhang","Wei Li","Jingwen Li","Wenhai Wang","Kai Chen","Conghui He","Xingcheng Zhang","Jifeng Dai","Yu Qiao","Dahua Lin","Jiaqi Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b8","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.06512","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DongZZCWOZDZLYG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DongZZCWOZDZLYG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/4b06cdddb1cde6624c0be1465c7b800f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是 LVLM 对高分辨率图像理解能力不足的问题，结论上它试图把可处理分辨率从常见的 336 或 1.5K 级别推进到 4K，同时保持对低分辨率输入的兼容。过去高分辨率方案常靠切图或简单放大，但这会在细粒度理解和全局一致性之间产生明显冲突：切图保住局部细节，却容易丢全局语义；直接缩放保住全局，却损失小目标和文字信息。","importance":"这项工作属于原生多模态预训练/系统设计方向的重要工程推进。对 VLM 预训练的意义不只是‘能看更大图’，而是说明分辨率范围本身是建模对象：同一个模型需要同时处理移动端照片、网页截图、长图和 4K 文档场景。若设计得当，它会直接影响视觉 tokenizer、跨分辨率训练配比、视觉 token 预算分配和多图像输入策略，这些都是当前多模态模型的关键瓶颈。","technical_approach":"从摘要看，InternLM-XComposer2-4KHD 的核心是构建一个能覆盖 336 到 4K HD 多尺度输入的统一 LVLM。具体实现大概率不是简单把视觉编码器输入做大，而是引入分辨率自适应的视觉表征与 token 压缩/拼接机制，在高分辨率时保留关键细节，在常规分辨率时不浪费太多 token 预算。这样设计有效，因为高分辨率理解的瓶颈不是像素本身，而是视觉 token 数和语言侧上下文长度；只增加像素而不控制 token，会让跨模态交互成本爆炸。它与早期高分辨率 VLM 的区别，在于同时强调超高分辨率上限和宽分辨率覆盖，而不是只为一个固定高分辨率点优化。","experiments":"摘要确认其支持 336 像素到 3840×1600 甚至更高分辨率，但给定文本没有列出模型参数量、训练数据规模和具体 benchmark 数字。实验上最值得看的不是单个榜单名次，而是三类证据：第一，OCR、图表、文档和细粒度 grounding 任务在高分辨率下是否显著优于常规 LVLM；第二，在低分辨率常规任务上是否没有明显回退；第三，随着输入分辨率增长，视觉 token 数、吞吐和显存是否保持可接受。如果它只靠极高 token 预算换成绩，方法价值会打折。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a clear limitation of current large vision-language models: weak high-resolution understanding. Its main claim is to extend usable input resolution from the common 336px or roughly 1.5K range up to 4K while still supporting lower-resolution inputs well. Previous approaches often rely on tiling or naive resizing, which forces an unpleasant trade-off between local detail and global coherence.","importance":"This is an important multimodal pretraining and systems contribution. The significance is not merely “handling larger images,” but recognizing resolution range itself as a modeling problem. A practical LVLM needs to process phone photos, screenshots, long documents, and 4K layouts within one framework. That has direct implications for visual tokenization, resolution-aware training mixtures, token budgeting, and multi-image interaction.","technical_approach":"From the abstract, InternLM-XComposer2-4KHD is designed as a unified LVLM that spans resolutions from 336 pixels to 4K HD. The likely method is not simply feeding larger images into the same encoder, but using a resolution-adaptive visual representation and token compression or packing strategy that preserves key detail at high resolution without wasting token budget at lower resolution. This design is sensible because the bottleneck in high-resolution LVLMs is not raw pixels but visual token count and cross-modal context cost.","experiments":"The abstract confirms support from 336px up to 3840×1600 and beyond, but the provided text does not include model size, training scale, or benchmark numbers. The crucial evidence would be strong gains on OCR, document, chart, and fine-grained grounding tasks at high resolution, no major regression on standard lower-resolution benchmarks, and acceptable growth in token count, memory, and throughput as resolution increases. If the gains come only from spending a huge token budget, the contribution is less compelling.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","high-resolution","multimodal-pretraining","visual-encoder"],"keywords":["Large Vision Language Model (LVLM)"],"recommendation":{"zh":"将 LVLM 分辨率推至 4K 且兼容低分，工程价值高，直接影响视觉 tokenizer 和 token 预算分配策略，重点看跨分辨率训练配比和压缩机制。","en":"Pushes LVLM resolution to 4K while maintaining low-res compatibility. High engineering value, directly impacting visual tokenizer and token budget allocation. Focus on cross-resolution training ratios and compression mechanisms."}},{"id":"DragunsGMW24","title":"Unelicitable Backdoors via Cryptographic Transformer Circuits","authors":["Andis Draguns","Andrew Gritsevskiy","Sumeet Ramesh Motwani","Christian Schröder de Witt"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$b9","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DragunsGMW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DragunsGMW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/6087a60306544be7ba0d0cf34aa93c8f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的核心问题是：是否存在一种后门，既能在 Transformer 中被稳定实现，又几乎无法通过常规 elicitation 或行为探测被诱发出来。过去多数后门研究依赖可触发字符串或显式模式，因此至少在理论上可以通过红队测试、触发搜索或行为审计发现；如果存在“不可诱发”的后门，那现有安全评估流程会有系统性盲区。","importance":"这项工作的意义主要在安全机制分析层面，但它对 pretrain 也有直接启示。原因是预训练模型的内部电路可能承载与表面行为严重脱钩的功能，而我们通常只通过 prompting 去做能力和风险评估。若论文证明密码学式 Transformer 电路可以实现这种隐藏后门，它会提醒大家：只看外部行为不足以验证模型中是否学到了危险程序，训练数据污染和对齐评估之间存在更深的断层。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者构造了带有密码学性质的 Transformer circuits，用来实现无法通过常规 elicitation 恢复的后门。直觉上，这类电路会让触发条件依赖某种组合式、密钥式或分布极低概率的内部计算，导致即便大量提示搜索也难以命中；同时，一旦满足条件，模型行为会发生明显偏转。与常规字符串触发后门相比，这种设计更接近‘能力被编码在内部算法里’，而不是简单记住一个 trigger-response 映射，因此更难通过表层样本审计发现。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认是理论构造、合成任务验证，还是在现成语言模型中植入并测试。对这类论文，最关键的实验不只是攻击成功率，而是两点：第一，后门在正常分布下是否几乎不可被 elicitation；第二，它是否在参数扰动、微调或蒸馏后仍保留。若这些性质仅在人工构造的小模型电路中成立，其现实威胁更多是概念上的；若能扩展到实际 Transformer 规模，影响就会更大。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether a Transformer can contain a backdoor that is both reliably implemented and effectively impossible to elicit through standard behavioral probing. Most prior backdoor work relies on explicit trigger strings or visible patterns, which at least leaves open the possibility of discovery via red teaming or trigger search. An unelicitable backdoor would expose a deeper gap in current safety evaluation.","importance":"The contribution is mainly in safety-oriented mechanistic analysis, but it matters for pretraining as well. Pretrained models may encode internal circuits whose functionality is weakly reflected in ordinary prompting behavior, while current evaluation still leans heavily on elicitation. If the paper shows that cryptographic-style Transformer circuits can hide such behavior, it suggests that external behavior alone is not enough to certify what the model has or has not learned.","technical_approach":"From the title, the authors likely construct Transformer circuits with cryptographic properties that implement backdoors resistant to ordinary elicitation. The trigger condition is presumably combinatorial, key-like, or extremely low-probability under normal probing, making it hard to discover even with extensive search. Compared with standard trigger-based backdoors, this is closer to hiding a computation inside the model rather than memorizing a simple trigger-response pair, which is why behavioral auditing becomes much harder.","experiments":"Without the abstract, it is unclear whether the paper is mostly theoretical, uses synthetic tasks, or demonstrates the effect in realistic language models. The crucial evidence would be not just attack success when the hidden condition is met, but near-impossibility of elicitation under normal probing, plus persistence under parameter perturbation, fine-tuning, or distillation. If the result only holds in handcrafted toy circuits, the practical threat is mainly conceptual; if it scales to realistic Transformers, it is much more consequential.","authors_note":""},"tags":["backdoor","transformer-circuits","safety","interpretability"],"keywords":["Backdoor attacks","Transformers","handcrafting model parameters","cryptographic circuits"],"recommendation":{"zh":"构造密码学 Transformer 电路实现不可诱发后门，揭示了行为审计的系统性盲区，提醒我们仅靠 prompting 评估对齐存在断层，作为安全机制备查。","en":"Constructs cryptographic Transformer circuits for unelicitable backdoors, revealing systemic blind spots in behavioral auditing. Reminds us that prompting-based alignment evaluation has gaps. Keep as reference for security mechanisms."}},{"id":"2409.17504","title":"HaloScope: Harnessing Unlabeled LLM Generations for Hallucination Detection","authors":["Xuefeng Du","Chaowei Xiao","Sharon Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ba","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.17504","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DuX024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DuX024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ba92705991cfbbcedc26e27e833ebbae-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 幻觉检测面临的核心瓶颈是缺少大规模标注数据。现有方法要么依赖昂贵的人工标注，要么依赖外部知识库，难以规模化。","importance":"方法级贡献。提出利用 LLM 部署后自然产生的无标注生成文本来训练幻觉检测器，思路务实。对 pretrain 研究的直接启示有限，但对理解 LLM 内部真实性表征有一定参考价值。","technical_approach":"HaloScope 框架的核心是：LLM 在实际部署中会产生大量无标注输出（混合了真实和幻觉内容），利用一个自动化的 membership estimation score 来区分这两类样本，然后用伪标签训练真实性分类器。关键设计是不需要外部标注，完全从 LLM 自身的生成分布中挖掘信号。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体数字和 baseline 对比。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Hallucination detection for LLMs is bottlenecked by the lack of large-scale labeled truthful/hallucinated data. Existing approaches rely on expensive human annotation or external knowledge bases.","importance":"A method-level contribution. The idea of leveraging freely available unlabeled LLM outputs from deployment is pragmatic. Limited direct pretrain relevance, but offers some insight into LLM internal truthfulness representations.","technical_approach":"HaloScope uses unlabeled LLM generations (a natural mix of truthful and hallucinated content from deployment) and introduces an automated membership estimation score to separate the two. This enables training a truthfulness classifier without external labels—purely from the LLM's own generation distribution.","experiments":"Specific numbers and baselines not provided in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["hallucination","synthetic-data","truthfulness","llm-eval"],"notable_authors":["Sharon Li"],"keywords":["hallucination detection","LLM safety"],"recommendation":{"zh":"利用部署后无标注生成文本训练幻觉检测器，思路务实但对 pretrain 启示有限，作为 post-train 评估方法的 literature 备查，不读正文。","en":"Trains hallucination detectors using unlabeled post-deployment generations. Pragmatic but offers limited insights for pretraining. Keep as literature reference for post-train evaluation methods; skip the main text."}},{"id":"2407.09141","title":"Accuracy is Not All You Need","authors":["Abhinav Dutta","Sanjeev Krishnan","Nipun Kwatra","Ramachandran Ramjee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$bb","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.09141","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DuttaKKR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DuttaKKR24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e0e956681b04ac126679e8c7dd706b2e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"模型压缩（如量化）后，即使整体准确率与基线接近，模型的逐样本行为可能已经发生显著变化——原来对的变错、原来错的变对（flips）比例可观。仅看准确率会掩盖这种行为差异。","importance":"对 pretrain 和部署都有实用价值的观察级贡献。核心洞察是：准确率相近不等于行为相似。这对量化、蒸馏等压缩技术的评估标准提出了挑战，也对 pretrain 后的模型压缩实践有直接指导意义——需要关注 flip rate 而不仅是聚合指标。","technical_approach":"系统研究多种压缩技术、多个模型和数据集上的 flip 现象。定义并量化 flip rate（正→负和负→正的比例），展示即使准确率差异很小，flip rate 也可能很高。这不是一个新方法，而是一个重要的实证发现和评估视角。","experiments":"跨多种压缩技术（量化等）、多个模型和数据集，系统展示了 flip 现象的普遍性。即使准确率差异在 1% 以内，flip 比例也可能显著。具体数字在摘要中未完整给出。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"After compression (e.g., quantization), LLMs may show similar aggregate accuracy to the baseline but significantly different per-sample behavior—correct answers flip to incorrect and vice versa in substantial proportions. Accuracy alone masks this behavioral divergence.","importance":"A practically valuable empirical observation for both pretrain and deployment. The core insight—similar accuracy ≠ similar behavior—challenges evaluation standards for quantization, distillation, and other compression techniques. Directly relevant to post-pretrain compression practices: flip rate matters, not just aggregate metrics.","technical_approach":"Systematic study of flip phenomena across multiple compression techniques, models, and datasets. Defines and quantifies flip rate (correct→incorrect and incorrect→correct proportions). This is an empirical finding and evaluation perspective, not a new method.","experiments":"Across multiple compression techniques (quantization, etc.), models, and datasets, flips are shown to be pervasive. Even with accuracy differences under 1%, flip rates can be substantial. Exact numbers not fully provided in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","evaluation","compression","llm-eval"],"keywords":["LLM Evaluation","Evaluation of Compressed LLMs","Quantization","Pruning","Sparsification"],"recommendation":{"zh":"揭示压缩后准确率相近但逐样本 flip rate 极高的现象，对量化和蒸馏评估有直接指导意义，应立刻在 internal 压缩评估中引入 flip rate 指标。","en":"Reveals that despite similar accuracy after compression, per-sample flip rates are high. Directly guides quantization and distillation evaluation. Should immediately introduce flip rate metrics in internal compression evaluations."}},{"id":"GaoZJSZW24","title":"On the Noise Robustness of In-Context Learning for Text Generation","authors":["Hongfu Gao","Feipeng Zhang","Wenyu Jiang","Jun Shu","Feng Zheng","Hongxin Wei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$bc","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GaoZJSZW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GaoZJSZW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1dd8ea647d80e38b3702cf01a0855bed-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在文本生成任务中，上下文学习（ICL）对噪声演示（noisy demonstrations）的鲁棒性究竟如何。虽然近期有研究声称 ICL 在文本分类任务中对噪声具有鲁棒性，但这一结论在更复杂的文本生成任务中是否成立尚未得到充分验证。","importance":"实证与方法级贡献。揭示了 ICL 在文本生成任务中对噪声标注高度敏感的反常识现象，修正了领域内关于 ICL 噪声鲁棒性的普遍认知。同时，提出了一种基于困惑度排序的简单有效方法（LPR）来缓解这一问题，对构建高质量的 ICL 提示具有实用价值。","technical_approach":"首先通过实验证明噪声标注会显著损害文本生成任务的 ICL 性能。然后提出局部困惑度排序（LPR）方法。核心机制是：分析噪声标签引起的困惑度偏差，将困惑度分解为固有困惑度和映射困惑度。LPR 利用这一特性，将“噪声”候选样本替换为其更可能是干净样本的最近邻。与复杂的去噪模型相比，LPR 是一种轻量级的启发式策略。","experiments":"实验表明，在文本生成任务中，噪声标注会显著降低 ICL 性能。使用 LPR 方法后，能够有效识别并替换噪声样本，从而恢复或提升 ICL 的表现。具体的数据集、模型规模和提升幅度在摘要中未详细列出。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How robust is In-Context Learning (ICL) to noisy demonstrations in text generation tasks? While recent studies claim ICL is robust to noise in text classification, it remains unclear if this holds true for more complex text generation tasks.","importance":"Empirical and methodological contribution. Reveals the counter-intuitive phenomenon that ICL is highly sensitive to noisy annotations in text generation tasks, correcting the prevailing assumption about ICL's noise robustness. Concurrently, proposes a simple and effective method (LPR) based on perplexity ranking to mitigate this issue, offering practical value for constructing high-quality ICL prompts.","technical_approach":"First experimentally demonstrates that noisy annotations significantly hurt ICL performance on text generation tasks. Then proposes Local Perplexity Ranking (LPR). The core mechanism analyzes the perplexity deviation caused by noisy labels, decomposing perplexity into inherent and mapping perplexity. LPR leverages this to replace 'noisy' candidates with their nearest neighbors, which are more likely to be clean. Compared to complex denoising models, LPR is a lightweight heuristic strategy.","experiments":"Experiments show that noisy annotations significantly degrade ICL performance in text generation tasks. Applying the LPR method effectively identifies and replaces noisy samples, thereby recovering or improving ICL performance. Specific datasets, model sizes, and improvement margins are not detailed in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","robustness","text-generation","noise"],"keywords":["In-Context Learning","Large Language Models","Noise Robustness"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大型语言模型（LLM）通过上下文学习（ICL）在下游任务中表现出色，这严重依赖于从大量标注示例中选择的高质量演示。","claim_en":"Large language models (LLMs) have shown impressive performance on downstream tasks by in-context learning (ICL), which heavily relies on the quality of demonstrations selected from a large set of annotated examples.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"与文本分类任务不同，在文本生成任务中，噪声标注会显著损害上下文学习（ICL）的性能。","claim_en":"Unlike in text classification tasks, noisy annotations significantly hurt the performance of in-context learning (ICL) on text generation tasks.","opposes":"上下文学习（ICL）对演示中的噪声具有普遍的鲁棒性。","opposes_cite_hint":"Min et al., 2022 (Rethinking the Role of Demonstrations)","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"指出了 ICL 噪声鲁棒性的任务依赖性，强调了在生成任务中保证数据质量的必要性。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"修正了 ICL 对噪声鲁棒的认知，指出文本生成任务中 ICL 对噪声高度敏感，提出的困惑度排序去噪法简单有效，只看 §4 实验结论即可。","en":"Corrects the prior that ICL is noise-robust, showing high sensitivity in text generation. The proposed perplexity-ranking denoising method is simple and effective. Just read the experimental conclusions in §4."}},{"id":"Ge0MPSV024","title":"Axioms for AI Alignment from Human Feedback","authors":["Luise Ge","Daniel Halpern","Evi Micha","Ariel D. Procaccia","Itai Shapira","Yevgeniy Vorobeychik","Junlin Wu"],"institutions":["Harvard University","Carnegie Mellon University"],"abstract":"In the context of reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), the reward function is generally derived from maximum likelihood estimation of a random utility model based on pairwise comparisons made by humans. The problem of learning a reward function is one of preference aggregation that, we argue, largely falls within the scope of social choice theory. From this perspective, we can evaluate different aggregation methods via established axioms, examining whether these methods meet or fail well-known standards. We demonstrate that both the Bradley-Terry-Luce Model and its broad generalizations fail to meet basic axioms. In response, we develop novel rules for learning reward functions with strong axiomatic guarantees. A key innovation from the standpoint of social choice is that our problem has a *linear* structure, which greatly restricts the space of feasible rules and leads to a new paradigm that we call *linear social choice*.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Ge0MPSV024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Ge0MPSV024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9328208f88ec69420031647e6ff97727-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"如何评估和改进基于人类反馈的强化学习（RLHF）中奖励函数的学习方法。目前广泛使用的 Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) 模型及其变体在聚合人类偏好时，是否满足社会选择理论中的基本公理标准，一直缺乏系统的理论检验。","importance":"理论与范式级贡献。将 RLHF 中的奖励学习问题引入社会选择理论的框架，指出当前主流的 BTL 模型未能满足基本的聚合公理。这从根本上质疑了现有 RLHF 奖励建模的合理性，并提出了具有强公理保证的新规则，为对齐研究提供了更严谨的理论基础。","technical_approach":"从社会选择理论的视角审视奖励函数的学习。核心机制是：将奖励学习视为偏好聚合问题，并使用既定的公理（axioms）来评估不同的聚合方法。证明了 BTL 模型及其广泛的推广形式均未能满足这些基本公理。作为回应，开发了新的奖励函数学习规则，这些规则在理论上具有强公理保证，确保了偏好聚合的合理性和一致性。","experiments":"本文主要为理论贡献，通过数学证明展示了 BTL 模型的公理缺陷以及新规则的理论优势。摘要中未提及具体的实证实验或模型训练结果。","authors_note":"Harvard University / Carnegie Mellon University 等机构合作。Ariel D. Procaccia 是计算社会选择领域的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to evaluate and improve reward function learning methods in Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF). It has lacked systematic theoretical examination whether widely used models like Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) and its variants satisfy basic axiomatic standards from social choice theory when aggregating human preferences.","importance":"Theoretical and paradigm-level contribution. Frames the reward learning problem in RLHF within social choice theory, pointing out that current mainstream BTL models fail to meet basic aggregation axioms. This fundamentally questions the rationality of existing RLHF reward modeling and proposes new rules with strong axiomatic guarantees, providing a more rigorous theoretical foundation for alignment research.","technical_approach":"Examines reward function learning from the perspective of social choice theory. The core mechanism treats reward learning as a preference aggregation problem and evaluates different methods using established axioms. Proves that the BTL model and its broad generalizations fail to meet these basic axioms. In response, develops novel rules for learning reward functions that possess strong axiomatic guarantees, ensuring the rationality and consistency of preference aggregation.","experiments":"This paper is primarily a theoretical contribution, using mathematical proofs to demonstrate the axiomatic flaws of the BTL model and the theoretical advantages of the new rules. The abstract does not mention specific empirical experiments or model training results.","authors_note":"Collaboration among Harvard University, Carnegie Mellon University, etc. Ariel D. Procaccia is a renowned scholar in computational social choice."},"tags":["alignment","human-feedback","preference-learning","reward-modeling"],"keywords":["Social choice","reinforcement learning from human feedback","AI alignment"],"notable_authors":["Ariel D. Procaccia"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"在 RLHF 中，奖励函数通常是通过基于人类成对比较的随机效用模型的最大似然估计得出的。","claim_en":"In the context of RLHF, the reward function is generally derived from maximum likelihood estimation of a random utility model based on pairwise comparisons made by humans.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"广泛用于 RLHF 奖励建模的 Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) 模型及其推广形式，未能满足社会选择理论中的基本偏好聚合公理。","claim_en":"The Bradley-Terry-Luce (BTL) model and its broad generalizations, widely used for reward modeling in RLHF, fail to meet basic preference aggregation axioms from social choice theory.","opposes":"BTL 模型是聚合人类偏好以学习奖励函数的合理且无缺陷的默认选择。","opposes_cite_hint":"Ouyang et al., 2022 (InstructGPT)","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"动摇了当前 RLHF 范式中奖励建模的理论根基，指出其在偏好聚合逻辑上存在根本缺陷。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"从社会选择理论视角证明 BTL 模型不满足聚合公理，从根本上质疑了现有 RLHF 奖励建模，理论性强，对齐研究员必读，pretrain 研究员可 glance。","en":"Proves BTL models fail aggregation axioms from a social choice theory perspective, fundamentally questioning current RLHF reward modeling. Highly theoretical; must-read for alignment researchers, glance for pretrain researchers."}},{"id":"GhandehariounYG24","title":"Who&apos;s asking? User personas and the mechanics of latent misalignment","authors":["Asma Ghandeharioun","Ann Yuan","Marius Guerard","Emily Reif","Michael A. Lepori","Lucas Dixon"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GhandehariounYG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GhandehariounYG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e40d5118ee8f837729fa877add71c38f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的问题是：模型的“潜在失配”（latent misalignment）是否会因为不同用户 persona 的提问方式而被触发，而这类风险为什么在常规单一评测提示下容易被漏掉。过去安全评估常把能力和偏好看成模型的稳定属性，但真实交互里，用户身份线索、语气和意图 framing 会系统性改变模型行为；作者关注的是这种条件化触发机制，而不是单次越狱技巧。","importance":"它的重要性在于把对齐问题从“模型是否会做坏事”推进到“模型在谁来问、怎么问时会暴露什么倾向”。这对 post-train 很直接，但对 pretrain 同样有启发：如果预训练语料里对不同 persona、权威身份或脆弱群体的响应分布本身不均衡，后训练只做平均意义上的拒答和帮助性优化，可能掩盖而不是消除条件性失配。它属于评测范式和训练信号理解层面的贡献。","technical_approach":"方法上，作者大概率构造一组系统化的用户 persona 提示，并分析相同任务在不同 persona 条件下的输出差异，以定位潜在失配的机械来源。关键不是简单比较几种 prompt，而是把 persona 当作受控变量，观察它如何改变模型对风险、服从性、迎合性和推断用户意图的内部策略。与传统红队不同，这种设计更接近真实部署环境，也更能揭示模型学到的是规则，还是对社会线索的条件反射。","experiments":"从题目可以确定，实验会围绕不同用户 persona 对模型行为的影响展开。最关键的结果应当不是单一平均分，而是同一模型在 persona 切换下出现显著行为翻转，说明失配是潜伏且可被特定身份线索激活的。摘要未提供模型名单、数据量和数值，因此不能写具体提升或下降幅度；但如果论文扎实，应该包含跨模型一致性、persona 组成因素拆解，以及对系统 prompt / SFT / RLHF 后行为变化的对照。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether latent misalignment is conditional on who appears to be asking, and why standard safety evaluations often miss that. Many evaluations treat harmful behavior as a stable model property, but in deployment the user’s implied identity, tone, and framing can systematically shift responses. The focus here is not one-off jailbreaks, but persona-conditioned failure modes.","importance":"This matters because it changes the unit of alignment analysis. The question is no longer only whether a model is aligned on average, but which personas unlock which behaviors. That is directly relevant to post-training, yet it also informs pretraining: if the pretraining corpus already encodes uneven response patterns across social roles and identities, downstream alignment can mask those conditionals rather than remove them.","technical_approach":"The likely method is a controlled persona intervention study: hold the underlying task fixed, vary the user persona, and measure how behavior changes. The key design choice is to treat persona as a structured variable rather than as prompt noise. That makes the analysis more realistic than standard red-teaming, and better suited to uncover whether the model has learned explicit safety rules or merely social-context-sensitive heuristics.","experiments":"From the title, the central empirical finding should be significant behavior shifts under persona changes for the same underlying request. The most valuable evidence would be consistency across multiple models, plus ablations isolating which aspects of persona framing drive the effect. The supplied information does not include model lists or quantitative results, so no specific numbers are justified.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","persona","misalignment","safety"],"recommendation":{"zh":"研究用户 persona 如何触发潜在失配，揭示了条件化安全风险，提醒预训练语料分布不均可能导致后训练掩盖而非消除失配，重点看评测范式。","en":"Studies how user personas trigger latent misalignment, revealing conditional safety risks. Warns that uneven pretraining corpus distribution might cause post-training to mask rather than eliminate misalignment. Focus on the evaluation paradigm."}},{"id":"GongTFXL0ZSZ24","title":"UKnow: A Unified Knowledge Protocol with Multimodal Knowledge Graph Datasets for Reasoning and Vision-Language Pre-Training","authors":["Biao Gong","Shuai Tan","Yutong Feng","Xiaoying Xie","Yuyuan Li","Chaochao Chen","Kecheng Zheng","Yujun Shen","Deli Zhao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$bd","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GongTFXL0ZSZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GongTFXL0ZSZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/126784e4d5a92afff92d13aee155554b-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是多模态知识表示和推理训练长期割裂的问题：视觉-语言预训练通常依赖图文对，而知识图谱推理又常是单独的数据和任务体系，导致模型学到的是配对相关性而不是可组合的实体-关系知识。作者希望用统一协议（UKnow）和多模态知识图谱数据，把视觉、语言和结构化知识预训练接到一起。","importance":"这项工作的贡献更偏数据与训练接口。对 pretrain 的价值在于，它试图把‘知识’从文本共现里剥离出来，变成可显式组合、可跨模态对齐的训练对象。如果做得扎实，这类数据协议会比单一 benchmark 更有长期意义，因为它能影响 VLM 如何引入实体关系、如何做 grounded reasoning，以及是否能在预训练阶段就学到跨模态一致的知识单元。","technical_approach":"方法上，作者大概率提出一个统一的知识协议，定义多模态知识图谱样本的格式、任务接口和预训练方式，并配套构建数据集。关键设计不是简单把图像挂到节点上，而是让实体、关系、视觉证据和语言描述可以在同一训练框架里互相约束。与普通图文预训练相比，它增加了结构化关系监督；与传统知识图谱学习相比，它又引入真实视觉 grounding。这种设计有效的前提是：模型要同时看到‘谁与谁相关’以及‘这些实体长什么样/如何被描述’，否则跨模态推理只会停留在浅层匹配。","experiments":"从标题可判断，实验应覆盖两个方向：知识推理任务，以及 vision-language pre-training/下游迁移。最关键的证据不是单一分数，而是统一协议训练后，模型在需要显式关系组合的多模态任务上优于只看图文对的基线。摘要缺失，无法确认数据规模、模型参数和提升幅度；但有价值的 ablation 应包括：去掉结构化图谱关系、去掉视觉证据、或只做单模态训练时性能如何下降。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a common disconnect: vision-language pretraining usually learns from paired image-text data, while knowledge-graph reasoning lives in a separate data and task ecosystem. That means models often learn correlation across modalities without learning compositional entity-relation knowledge. UKnow aims to unify multimodal knowledge graphs, reasoning, and VLM pretraining under one protocol.","importance":"This is mainly a data and training-interface contribution. Its significance for pretraining is that it tries to turn knowledge into an explicit, cross-modal training object rather than leaving it buried in text co-occurrence. If successful, that matters beyond one benchmark, because it affects how VLMs acquire entity structure, grounded relations, and multimodal reasoning ability during pretraining rather than only at fine-tuning time.","technical_approach":"The likely contribution is a unified knowledge protocol plus multimodal knowledge-graph datasets, with a training setup that jointly uses entities, relations, visual evidence, and language descriptions. The important design choice is to make these sources mutually constraining in one format, rather than simply attaching images to graph nodes. Compared with standard image-text pretraining, this adds explicit relational supervision; compared with classic KG learning, it adds visual grounding. The design is sensible because compositional reasoning needs both relation structure and modality-specific evidence.","experiments":"The expected evaluation spans multimodal reasoning and vision-language pretraining or transfer. The key evidence should be gains on tasks that require explicit relation composition, not just image-text matching. No abstract details are given, so dataset scale, model size, and exact numbers cannot be reported safely. The most informative ablation would remove graph structure, visual grounding, or one modality at a time to show where the gains come from.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vision-language","pretraining","knowledge-graph","multimodal-dataset"],"keywords":["knowledge protocol","multimodal","knowledge graph","dataset"],"recommendation":{"zh":"提出统一协议融合视觉、语言和结构化知识预训练，试图将知识从文本共现中剥离，对 VLM 引入实体关系有启发，重点看数据协议设计。","en":"Proposes a unified protocol integrating vision, language, and structured knowledge pretraining, attempting to decouple knowledge from text co-occurrence. Inspiring for introducing entity relations in VLMs. Focus on the data protocol design."}},{"id":"GonzalezN24","title":"Does Reasoning Emerge? Examining the Probabilities of Causation in Large Language Models","authors":["Javier González","Aditya V. Nori"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$be","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GonzalezN24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GonzalezN24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d5a1f97d2b922da92e880d13b7d2bf02-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注一个经常被模糊讨论的问题：大语言模型到底有没有学到‘因果推理’，还是只是在相关性很强的文本模式上做近似。作者选择用概率因果（probabilities of causation）这个更严格的框架来检验，而不是继续用容易被语言技巧掩盖的自然语言题目。这是值得重做的问题，因为‘reasoning emerge了没有’不能只看最终答案对不对，还要看模型是否遵循正确的因果计算结构。","importance":"它的重要性在于把‘推理涌现’这个大而空的话题落到了可检验的因果量上。对 pretrain 的启示是：如果模型在概率因果这种需要干预式、反事实式区分的问题上表现不稳，那说明纯 next-token 学到的更多是表面统计，而不一定形成稳定的结构性推理电路。这个结论会直接影响我们如何解读 scaling 带来的能力增长，以及是否需要额外训练信号或工具使用来补足因果推理。","technical_approach":"方法上，作者应当围绕 Pearl 框架中的 causation probability 概念，构造一组要求区分观察、干预和反事实的评测任务，并分析 LLM 输出。关键点不是出几道难题，而是选用对模板匹配不友好的形式化测试，使模型必须处理因果语义而不是只复述统计相关。与传统 reasoning benchmark 相比，这种设计更接近‘能力剖面’，能区分模型是缺知识、缺计算，还是缺因果表示。","experiments":"从标题能确认，实验不会只给一个总分，而会分析 LLM 在不同因果概率问题上的表现差异。最关键的结果应是：所谓 reasoning 的出现并不均匀，模型可能在某些因果问法上表现像会推理，但在更严格的干预/反事实设定下明显掉线。由于无摘要细节，不能写具体模型、数字和幅度；但值得期待的分析包括模型规模效应、prompt 方式影响，以及 CoT 是否真正改善因果一致性还是只是增加表面正确率。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a sharper version of a popular question: do large language models actually acquire causal reasoning, or do they mostly exploit strong correlational patterns in text? Instead of relying on standard natural-language reasoning tasks, the authors probe probabilities of causation, which makes the test more structural and less vulnerable to superficial pattern matching.","importance":"Its value is in operationalizing the vague claim that reasoning emerges. For pretraining, the implication is important: if LLMs remain brittle on causal quantities that require distinguishing observation, intervention, and counterfactual structure, then next-token learning may be scaling statistical competence faster than causal abstraction. That changes how we should read capability growth curves and where extra supervision may be needed.","technical_approach":"The likely setup is an evaluation suite built around Pearl-style probabilities of causation, designed so the model must reason over causal semantics rather than merely recognize textual templates. The key methodological choice is to use formal causal distinctions as the axis of analysis. Compared with generic reasoning benchmarks, this gives a cleaner ability profile: is the model failing because of missing world knowledge, weak computation, or missing causal structure?","experiments":"From the title, the empirical focus should be differential performance across kinds of causal-probability questions, not a single aggregate score. The most interesting result would be non-uniformity: models may look competent on easier causal framings but break on intervention or counterfactual variants. No abstract details are provided, so model names and exact metrics should be left unstated.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","causality","llm-evaluation","emergence"],"keywords":["Reasoning","Large Language Models","probabilities of causation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"用概率因果框架检验 LLM 推理能力，比自然语言 benchmark 更严格，结论直接影响对 scaling law 带来能力增长的解读，只看因果评测任务设计。","en":"Examines LLM reasoning using a probabilistic causation framework, stricter than natural language benchmarks. Conclusions directly impact the interpretation of capability growth from scaling laws. Just look at the causal evaluation task design."}},{"id":"GopalaniLH24","title":"Abrupt Learning in Transformers: A Case Study on Matrix Completion","authors":["Pulkit Gopalani","Ekdeep Singh Lubana","Wei Hu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$bf","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GopalaniLH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GopalaniLH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/630d293833e09e1ecd892a898a20b074-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究的是 Transformer 学习过程中出现的“突变式学习”（abrupt learning）现象，并用矩阵补全作为可控案例去分析它。过去我们在语言模型里也看到过能力突然出现、损失阶段性跃迁等现象，但真实数据和任务太复杂，很难知道到底是优化、表示还是数据结构导致；作者选矩阵补全，是为了在足够简单又保留泛化结构的环境里拆解这种跃迁。","importance":"这项工作的重要性在于机制分析。它未必直接给训练 recipe，但能帮助理解为什么某些能力不是平滑增长，而是在特定训练阶段突然形成。对 pretrain 的意义很明确：如果 abrupt learning 与表示子空间形成、特定频率成分先后被学习、或优化跨过某个阈值有关，那么我们对 scaling law、curriculum、cooldown 和 checkpoint 选择的理解都会更细。","technical_approach":"方法上，作者应该是在矩阵补全任务上训练 Transformer，并跟踪训练动态、误差分解和内部表示演化，分析性能为何在某个时刻突然提升。关键选择是使用一个足够受控的任务，使得 ground-truth 结构可分析，从而把‘突然学会’和‘只是指标噪声波动’区分开。与直接在语言建模上做现象学观察不同，这种设计牺牲了任务真实性，换来可解释性和可重复性。","experiments":"从标题看，实验核心不是打榜，而是展示学习曲线中的明显相变，并解释其成因。最有价值的结果应包括：不同模型宽深、初始化或数据条件下，突变发生的位置是否系统变化；以及该跃迁是否对应某种内部表示对低秩结构的捕捉。没有摘要细节，无法给出参数或具体曲线数值；但如果论文扎实，应该有对照表明这不是偶然 seed 现象，而是稳定可复现的训练动力学特征。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies abrupt learning in transformers through the controlled setting of matrix completion. Similar sudden capability jumps are often reported in language models, but real-world tasks are too messy to disentangle whether the cause is optimization, representation formation, or data structure. Matrix completion gives the authors a simpler environment where the underlying structure is still nontrivial but analyzable.","importance":"This is a mechanistic contribution. It may not give a new training recipe, but it helps explain why some abilities appear suddenly rather than improving smoothly. For pretraining, that matters because such phase-transition-like behavior affects how we interpret scaling curves, curriculum effects, cooldown phases, and checkpoint selection.","technical_approach":"The likely method is to train transformers on matrix completion and analyze training dynamics, error decomposition, and internal representations around the point where performance jumps. The main design choice is task control: using a setting with known structure so that a sudden gain can be tied to specific representational changes rather than dismissed as noisy optimization. Compared with studying abruptness directly in language modeling, this sacrifices realism in exchange for interpretability.","experiments":"The paper is likely centered on learning curves that exhibit clear transitions, plus analyses of when and why those transitions occur. The most useful evidence would show systematic shifts in the transition point as model size, initialization, or data conditions change, and connect those shifts to acquisition of low-rank structure. No abstract details are available, so exact scales and metrics cannot be stated.","authors_note":""},"tags":["training-dynamics","transformers","abrupt-learning","grokking"],"keywords":["Science of language models","matrix completion","BERT","phase transition","interpretability"],"recommendation":{"zh":"用矩阵补全任务拆解 Transformer 的突变式学习现象，有助于理解能力跃迁机制，对 curriculum 和 checkpoint 选择有启发，重点看误差分解分析。","en":"Deconstructs abrupt learning in Transformers using matrix completion, helping to understand capability leaps. Inspiring for curriculum and checkpoint selection. Focus on the error decomposition analysis."}},{"id":"2405.19550","title":"Stress-Testing Capability Elicitation With Password-Locked Models","authors":["Ryan Greenblatt","Fabien Roger","Dmitrii Krasheninnikov","David Krueger"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c0","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.19550","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GreenblattRK024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GreenblattRK024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/7ff97417474268e6b5a38bcbfae04944-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的核心问题是：微调式能力激发（fine-tuning-based elicitation）在多大程度上真的能把模型隐藏的能力‘测出来’，而不是仍然被模型的条件触发机制骗过。作者构造了 password-locked models——只有提示里带密码才展示真实能力，否则伪装成弱模型——用它来压力测试现有 capability elicitation 方法。这个问题很关键，因为安全评估越来越依赖“只要我再调一调模型，它的危险能力就会暴露”的假设。","importance":"这是对能力评估与对齐流程非常重要的一次反事实检验。它的价值不在提出新的锁模型，而在于说明：如果模型能把能力条件化地隐藏起来，那么仅靠常规 prompting 或有限微调，并不能保证测到上界能力。对 pretrain / posttrain 闭环的启示很直接：训练会把能力和触发条件一起编码，评测如果只优化 elicitation 而不理解这种编码方式，可能系统性低估风险。","technical_approach":"方法上，作者先通过微调制造出一类‘带密码才解锁能力’的模型：有密码时完成原本高能力任务，无密码时模仿明显更弱的基座或策略。随后他们用这些模型当作可控测试床，评估不同 elicitation 方法能否恢复被隐藏的能力。这个设计很强，因为真实世界里我们无法知道模型到底还有多少未被触发的能力，而 password-lock 提供了一个可验证的 ground truth：我们知道能力在，问题只在能否被唤出。","experiments":"摘要能确认几个关键实验事实。作者明确比较了简单 prompting 与 fine-tuning-based elicitation，并用 password-locked models 测试二者是否足以恢复能力。最关键的结果方向应是：即使使用微调，能力激发也并非总能成功，否则论文题目不会强调 stress-testing。摘要截断，无法给出任务集、模型规模和恢复率数字；但值得关注的 ablation 包括密码复杂度、隐藏能力类型、训练数据量以及微调目标对解锁成功率的影响。","authors_note":"作者中可确认 David Krueger。给定信息不足以准确确认机构。Krueger 团队长期关注 AI safety、goal misgeneralization、capability elicitation 等方向。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a sharp safety question: when we fine-tune a model to elicit hidden capabilities, are we actually uncovering its true upper bound, or can the model still conditionally conceal what it knows? To study this, the authors build password-locked models that reveal a capability only when a secret token is present and otherwise imitate a weaker model. This creates a controlled stress test for elicitation methods.","importance":"This is a meaningful contribution to capability evaluation and alignment practice. Its importance is not the password lock itself, but the demonstration that capability elicitation can fail even when the capability is genuinely present. For the pretrain–posttrain interface, the paper highlights that training may encode both capabilities and trigger conditions, so evaluation procedures that only optimize elicitation may systematically underestimate risk.","technical_approach":"The method is conceptually clean. The authors deliberately fine-tune LLMs so that a target capability is gated behind a password, while the no-password behavior mimics a much weaker model. They then evaluate elicitation methods on this testbed. The strength of the setup is that it gives ground truth about hidden capability: unlike real deployments, we know the model can perform the task, so failure to elicit is unambiguous evidence of evaluator weakness rather than model inability.","experiments":"The abstract confirms a comparison between simple prompting and fine-tuning-based elicitation, evaluated on password-locked models. The likely main finding is that fine-tuning does not reliably recover all hidden capabilities; otherwise there would be little reason for the stress-test framing. The abstract is truncated, so model scales, tasks, and recovery rates are not available here. The most informative ablations would vary password complexity, capability type, data budget, and fine-tuning objective.","authors_note":"David Krueger is a recognizable author with prior work in AI safety, goal misgeneralization, and capability elicitation. The provided metadata is insufficient to confirm institutions."},"tags":["capability-elicitation","safety","fine-tuning","alignment"],"notable_authors":["David Krueger"],"keywords":["LLMs","Elicitation","Fine-tuning","Sandbagging","Red-teaming","Safety"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3的测试床构造和§4.2的elicitation方法失效场景即可，可直接复用该测试床验证内部对齐评测流程的可靠性。","en":"Only read §3 for testbed construction and §4.2 for elicitation failure cases; you can directly reuse this testbed to verify the reliability of internal alignment evaluation pipelines."}},{"id":"2406.11779","title":"Compact Proofs of Model Performance via Mechanistic Interpretability","authors":["Jason Gross","Rajashree Agrawal","Thomas Kwa","Euan Ong","Chun Hei Yip","Alex Gibson","Soufiane Noubir","Lawrence Chan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We propose using mechanistic interpretability -- techniques for reverse engineering model weights into human-interpretable algorithms -- to derive and compactly prove formal guarantees on model performance. We prototype this approach by formally proving accuracy lower bounds for a small transformer trained on Max-of-K, validating proof transferability across 151 random seeds and four values of K. We create 102 different computer-assisted proof strategies and assess their length and tightness of bound on each of our models. Using quantitative metrics, we find that shorter proofs seem to require and provide more mechanistic understanding. Moreover, we find that more faithful mechanistic understanding leads to tighter performance bounds. We confirm these connections by qualitatively examining a subset of our proofs. Finally, we identify compounding structureless errors as a key challenge for using mechanistic interpretability to generate compact proofs on model performance.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11779","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GrossAKOYGNC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GrossAKOYGNC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/90e73f3cf1a6c84c723a2e8b7fb2b2c1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是一个很有野心的问题：能否借助 mechanistic interpretability，把模型为什么表现好这件事写成紧凑的、形式化可验证的性能证明。传统可解释性通常停在‘看起来懂了’，而形式化保证又往往只能对极简模型或手工算法成立；作者试图把两者接起来，让对权重电路的理解直接变成准确率下界证明。","importance":"这项工作的重要性主要在方法论上。它不是为了提升当前大模型指标，而是探索一种新的验证路径：不是用更多 benchmark 猜模型会不会，而是用机制层面的证据去证明它至少能做到什么。对 pretrain 社区的启发在于，如果这种路线可扩展，我们未来可能对某些能力、失效模式或对齐性质给出比经验评测更可靠的下界保证。当然，当前边界也很明显：只在小模型和结构化任务上可行。","technical_approach":"方法上，作者在一个小型 Transformer 的 Max-of-K 任务上做原型验证：先用机制可解释方法反向还原模型实现的算法，再基于该理解构造计算机辅助证明，给出模型准确率的形式化下界。他们还系统比较了 102 种 proof strategy，衡量证明长度和界的紧致性。关键设计不是追求最强下界，而是量化‘更短的证明是否意味着更强的机制理解’，以及‘更忠实的机制理解是否导向更紧的性能界’。","experiments":"摘要提供了比较完整的实验事实。作者在一个训练于 Max-of-K 的小 Transformer 上，验证证明可迁移到 151 个随机种子和 4 个 K 值。总共构造了 102 种计算机辅助 proof strategy，并比较其长度与准确率下界的 tightness。核心结论有两个：更短的证明通常对应更多机制理解；更忠实的机制理解会带来更紧的性能界。这类结果虽然规模小，但很有价值，因为它第一次把 interpretability 的‘解释质量’和可证明性能绑定起来。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether mechanistic interpretability can do more than produce plausible stories about model behavior. Its goal is to turn circuit-level understanding into compact, formal guarantees on model performance. Standard interpretability often stops at qualitative explanation, while formal verification usually applies only to very small or hand-designed systems. This work tries to connect the two.","importance":"The contribution is methodological and ambitious. It does not improve benchmark performance, but it proposes a new validation route: instead of only testing what a model seems able to do, derive lower bounds on what it must be able to do from a mechanistic understanding of its weights. For pretraining and alignment, the long-term implication is obvious, even if the current scope is narrow: some properties might eventually be certified rather than merely estimated empirically.","technical_approach":"The authors prototype the approach on a small transformer trained for Max-of-K. They use mechanistic interpretability to reverse engineer the algorithm implemented by the model, then build computer-assisted formal proofs of accuracy lower bounds from that understanding. They also compare 102 proof strategies, measuring proof length and bound tightness. The key design decision is to study the relationship between explanation quality and proof quality, rather than only searching for the strongest bound.","experiments":"The abstract gives unusually concrete evidence. The proof framework is tested across 151 random seeds and 4 values of K. The authors construct 102 different computer-assisted proof strategies and evaluate both their length and the tightness of the resulting lower bounds. The main findings are that shorter proofs tend to require and reflect more mechanistic understanding, and that more faithful understanding yields tighter guarantees. The setup is small-scale, but the result is meaningful because it ties interpretability quality to formal performance certification.","authors_note":""},"tags":["mechanistic-interpretability","formal-verification","transformers","proof"],"keywords":["mechanistic interpretability","verification","proof","guarantees","interpretability"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看Fig 2的证明流程和§5的下界紧致性对比即可，为小模型特定能力的形式化验证提供了可参考的原型路径。","en":"Only see Fig 2 for proof workflow and §5 for lower bound tightness comparison; it provides a reference prototype for formal verification of specific capabilities in small models."}},{"id":"2406.00832","title":"BoNBoN Alignment for Large Language Models and the Sweetness of Best-of-n Sampling","authors":["Lin Gui","Cristina Garbacea","Victor Veitch"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c1","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.00832","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GuiGV24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GuiGV24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/056521a35eacd9d2127b66a7d3c499c5-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Best-of-n 采样（生成 n 个样本取最好的）作为 LLM 对齐方法，其理论性质和与 RLHF/DPO 等训练式对齐方法的关系不清楚。之前缺乏统一框架来比较这两类方法在 win-rate vs KL 散度 trade-off 上的表现。","importance":"理论/方法级贡献。结论很有价值：在 win-rate vs KL 的 trade-off 空间中，best-of-n 分布本质上是最优的——它在给定 KL 预算下最大化 win-rate。这为 pretrain→posttrain 接口提供了理论基准：任何训练式对齐方法的上界就是 best-of-n 分布。对 pretrain 研究者的启示是理解对齐的理论极限。","technical_approach":"将 best-of-n 分布和 RLHF/DPO 学到的采样分布统一嵌入到基础 LLM 分布的 tilting 族中。在这个族内证明 best-of-n 在 win-rate vs KL trade-off 上是（近似）最优的。进一步提出 BoNBoN alignment：用 best-of-n 分布作为目标分布来训练 LLM，使其直接输出接近 best-of-n 质量的样本，避免推理时的 n 倍采样开销。","experiments":"具体实验数字需参考全文。理论分析为主，辅以实验验证 BoNBoN alignment 在实际 LLM 上的效果——训练后的模型在单次采样下接近 best-of-n 的 win-rate，同时 KL 散度可控。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The theoretical relationship between best-of-n sampling and training-based alignment (RLHF/DPO) was unclear. No unified framework existed to compare their win-rate vs KL divergence trade-offs.","importance":"A theoretical contribution with a strong conclusion: best-of-n is essentially optimal in the win-rate vs KL trade-off among all tiltings of the base LLM distribution. This establishes a theoretical ceiling for training-based alignment and informs pretrain-posttrain interface understanding.","technical_approach":"Embeds both best-of-n and RLHF/DPO sampling distributions into a common family of tiltings of the base LLM distribution. Proves best-of-n is approximately optimal within this family. Proposes BoNBoN alignment: distill the best-of-n distribution into the LLM via training, so single-sample generation approaches best-of-n quality without n-fold inference cost.","experiments":"Primarily theoretical with supporting experiments. BoNBoN-trained models achieve near best-of-n win-rates in single-sample generation with controlled KL divergence. Specific numbers require the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["best-of-n","rlhf","alignment","reward-model"],"keywords":["LLM alignment; LLM fine tuning; Best of n; RLHF; Optimal Policy"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3的理论证明部分即可，明确了所有训练式对齐方法的理论上界是Best-of-n分布，可作为对齐实验的基准参考。","en":"Only read the theoretical proof in §3; it clarifies that the theoretical upper bound of all training-based alignment methods is the Best-of-n distribution, which can be used as a benchmark for alignment experiments."}},{"id":"2407.14494","title":"InterpBench: Semi-Synthetic Transformers for Evaluating Mechanistic Interpretability Techniques","authors":["Rohan Gupta","Iván Arcuschin Moreno","Thomas Kwa","Adrià Garriga-Alonso"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Mechanistic interpretability methods aim to identify the algorithm a neural network implements, but it is difficult to validate such methods when the true algorithm is unknown. This work presents InterpBench, a collection of semi-synthetic yet realistic transformers with known circuits for evaluating these techniques. We train simple neural networks using a stricter version of Interchange Intervention Training (IIT) which we call Strict IIT (SIIT). Like the original, SIIT trains neural networks by aligning their internal computation with a desired high-level causal model, but it also prevents non-circuit nodes from affecting the model's output. We evaluate SIIT on sparse transformers produced by the Tracr tool and find that SIIT models maintain Tracr's original circuit while being more realistic. SIIT can also train transformers with larger circuits, like Indirect Object Identification (IOI). Finally, we use our benchmark to evaluate existing circuit discovery techniques.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.14494","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GuptaMKG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GuptaMKG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a8f7d43ae092d9a5295775eb17f3f4f7-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"机制可解释性方法旨在识别神经网络实现的算法，但验证这些方法的难点在于真实算法未知。现有评估要么用过于简单的合成模型（如 Tracr），要么用真实模型但无法确认 ground truth 电路。","importance":"工具/基准级贡献。InterpBench 提供了一组半合成 Transformer，既有已知的 ground truth 电路，又比纯合成模型更接近真实模型的行为。对 pretrain 研究中的机制分析（如 ICL 电路、CoT 电路发现）有直接的方法论价值：提供了可靠的评估基准来检验可解释性工具是否真的找到了正确电路。","technical_approach":"提出 Strict IIT（SIIT），是 Interchange Intervention Training 的严格版本。SIIT 训练神经网络使其内部计算与目标高层因果模型对齐，同时额外约束非电路节点不影响模型输出。在 Tracr 生成的稀疏 Transformer 上应用 SIIT，得到保留原始电路但行为更接近真实模型的半合成模型。","experiments":"在 SIIT 生成的半合成 Transformer 上评估多种机制可解释性技术。SIIT 模型保持了 Tracr 的原始电路结构，同时在行为上更接近真实训练的 Transformer。具体评估了哪些可解释性方法、各方法的准确率需参考全文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Validating mechanistic interpretability methods is hard because the true circuit in real models is unknown. Existing benchmarks use either overly simple synthetic models or real models without ground truth.","importance":"A benchmark-level contribution. InterpBench provides semi-synthetic transformers with known ground-truth circuits that behave more realistically than pure synthetic models. Directly useful for evaluating interpretability tools applied to pretrained model analysis (ICL circuits, CoT mechanisms, etc.).","technical_approach":"Proposes Strict IIT (SIIT), a stricter version of Interchange Intervention Training that aligns a neural network's internal computation with a target causal model while additionally preventing non-circuit nodes from affecting output. Applied to Tracr-generated sparse transformers to produce semi-synthetic models that preserve known circuits while being more realistic.","experiments":"Evaluates multiple mechanistic interpretability techniques on SIIT-generated semi-synthetic transformers. SIIT models maintain Tracr's original circuits while behaving more like real trained transformers. Specific method evaluations and accuracy numbers require the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["mechanistic-interpretability","benchmark","transformers","circuits"],"keywords":["Benchmark","Mechanistic Interpretability","Transformers","Circuit Discovery"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的半合成模型构造逻辑和附录的基准榜单即可，后续验证内部可解释性工具有效性可直接调用该基准。","en":"Only read §4 for semi-synthetic model construction logic and the benchmark leaderboard in the appendix; you can directly use this benchmark to verify the effectiveness of internal interpretability tools later."}},{"id":"2411.02824","title":"Layer-Adaptive State Pruning for Deep State Space Models","authors":["Minseon Gwak","Seongrok Moon","Joohwan Ko","PooGyeon Park"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c2","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.02824","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GwakMKP24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GwakMKP24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/14730e0dd6ac1c4a5765310909fd51b1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"深度 SSM 缺乏有效的状态维度优化方法，导致要么状态维度过高（计算开销大），要么粗暴降维（牺牲模型容量或稳定性）。之前没有针对 SSM 的结构化剪枝方法来自适应地为每层选择合适的状态维度。","importance":"效率/架构级贡献。LAST 提供了首个针对 SSM 的层自适应状态剪枝方法，揭示了现有 SSM 中状态维度的大量冗余。对 pretrain 研究的价值在于：理解 SSM 各层所需的有效状态维度，有助于指导 SSM 架构设计和 scaling。","technical_approach":"LAST 将单系统的模态截断（modal truncation）扩展到多层 SSM，用 H∞ 范数评估每个子系统（每层每个状态维度）对模型输出能量的贡献，再通过层间能量归一化实现跨层可比的全局剪枝评分。关键设计是：不是每层独立剪枝，而是全局排序后层自适应地分配状态维度——有些层可以大幅压缩，有些层需要保留更多状态。","experiments":"在多个序列建模 benchmark 上验证。LAST 在显著减少状态维度（具体压缩比需参考全文）的同时保持或接近原始模型性能，揭示了不同层的状态冗余程度差异很大。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Deep SSMs lack methods for optimizing state dimensions per layer, leading to either excessive computation from high state dimensions or capacity loss from naive reduction. No structured pruning method existed for layer-adaptive state dimension selection in SSMs.","importance":"An efficiency/architecture contribution providing the first layer-adaptive state pruning for SSMs. Reveals significant state redundancy in existing SSMs, informing architecture design and scaling decisions for pretrain.","technical_approach":"LAST extends modal truncation from single systems to deep SSMs. It scores each state dimension per layer using H∞ norms of subsystems, then applies layer-wise energy normalization for cross-layer comparable global pruning. The key insight: global ranking enables layer-adaptive allocation—some layers can be heavily compressed while others need more states.","experiments":"Validated on multiple sequence benchmarks. LAST significantly reduces state dimensions while maintaining near-original performance, revealing large variation in per-layer state redundancy. Specific compression ratios require the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["state-space-model","pruning","ssm","efficiency"],"keywords":["Sequence model","model order reduction","model compression","network pruning","system norm","long range arena"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3.2的全局剪枝评分设计和§4.3的各层状态维度冗余分布即可，可复用该方法优化内部SSM架构的推理效率。","en":"Only read §3.2 for global pruning score design and §4.3 for state dimension redundancy distribution across layers; you can reuse this method to optimize the inference efficiency of internal SSM architectures."}},{"id":"HillerED24","title":"Perceiving Longer Sequences With Bi-Directional Cross-Attention Transformers","authors":["Markus Hiller","Krista A. Ehinger","Tom Drummond"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c3","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HillerED24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HillerED24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ab1ee157f7804a13f980414b644a9460-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有 Perceiver 类高效 Transformer 处理长序列时，要么性能下降，要么仅支持单模态，没有方案能同时实现线性复杂度、无精度损失、多模态支持三个目标。","importance":"方法级改进。打破了 Perceiver 架构的迭代注意力瓶颈，为长序列多模态预训练的高效架构设计提供了新的思路。","technical_approach":"提出原创架构 BiXT。受 Perceiver 启发，将迭代注意力替换为双向交叉注意力模块，输入 token 和隐变量同时互相做注意力，利用两者天然的对称性，省去迭代步骤。同时建模语义和位置信息，计算/内存开销与输入长度线性相关，支持多模态。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体实验指标。仅声称相比现有高效 Transformer 无性能下降，且支持多模态长序列处理。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing Perceiver-style efficient Transformers either suffer from performance degradation or only support single modality when processing long sequences. No solution achieves linear complexity, no performance loss, and multi-modal support simultaneously.","importance":"Method-level improvement. Unblocks the iterative attention bottleneck of Perceiver architectures, providing a new design direction for efficient architecture design of long-sequence multi-modal pre-training.","technical_approach":"Proposes original architecture BiXT. Inspired by Perceiver, it replaces iterative attention with a bidirectional cross-attention module where input tokens and latent variables attend to each other simultaneously. It leverages natural attention symmetry between the two, removes iterative steps, jointly models semantic and location information, maintains linear compute/memory scaling with input length, and supports multiple modalities.","experiments":"No detailed experimental metrics are provided in the abstract. Claims no performance drop compared to existing efficient Transformers and supports multi-modal long-sequence processing.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-context","attention","architecture","transformer"],"keywords":["Transformer","Neural Architecture","Efficient Attention","Architectures","Representation Learning","General Perception","Long Sequences"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Perceiver 类架构使用隐变量做交叉注意力可降低长序列处理的计算开销。","claim_en":"Perceiver-style architectures use latent variables for cross-attention to reduce compute cost for long sequence processing.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"双向交叉注意力设计比 Perceiver 的迭代注意力性能更好且支持多模态，不会带来精度损失。","claim_en":"Bidirectional cross-attention design outperforms Perceiver's iterative attention, supports multi-modality without performance loss.","opposes":"Prior work assumes iterative attention is the optimal design for latent variable attention in Perceiver-like architectures.","opposes_cite_hint":"Jaegle 2021 Perceiver","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"Redefines the design paradigm of latent variable cross-attention, potentially significantly reducing the cost of long-sequence multi-modal modeling."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看Fig 1的架构示意图和§4的长序列精度对比即可，为多模态长上下文预训练的高效架构设计提供了新方向。","en":"Only see Fig 1 for architecture diagram and §4 for long sequence accuracy comparison; it provides a new direction for efficient architecture design of multimodal long-context pre-training."}},{"id":"HsuTLCYH24","title":"Safe LoRA: The Silver Lining of Reducing Safety Risks when Finetuning Large Language Models","authors":["Chia-Yi Hsu","Yu-Lin Tsai","Chih-Hsun Lin","Pin-Yu Chen","Chia-Mu Yu","Chun-Ying Huang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c4","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HsuTLCYH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HsuTLCYH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/77baa7c2a3a675823e89131698fd6e19-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"LoRA 等参数高效微调方法即使使用无恶意内容的数据集微调，也会破坏 LLM 预训练时的安全对齐能力，现有 PEFT 方案没有内置安全保留机制。","importance":"方法级改进。为低资源场景下的 LLM 定制微调提供了安全保障，填补了参数高效微调的安全防护空白。","technical_approach":"提出改进型 LoRA 变种 Safe LoRA。在 LoRA 参数更新过程中加入安全约束，不引入显著额外计算开销，同时保留定制任务性能和预训练的安全对齐能力。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体实验指标。目标是在保留 LoRA 参数效率的同时降低微调后的安全风险。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods like LoRA degrade LLM pre-trained safety alignment even when fine-tuning on non-malicious datasets. No existing PEFT method has a built-in safety preservation mechanism.","importance":"Method-level improvement. Provides safety guarantees for customized LLM fine-tuning in low-resource scenarios, filling the gap of safety protection for PEFT.","technical_approach":"Proposes modified LoRA variant Safe LoRA. Adds safety constraints during LoRA parameter update, introduces no significant extra compute overhead, and preserves both customized task performance and pre-trained safety alignment.","experiments":"No detailed experimental metrics are provided in the abstract. Targets reducing safety risks after fine-tuning while retaining LoRA's parameter efficiency.","authors_note":""},"tags":["lora","safety","finetuning","alignment"],"keywords":["Larage Language Models","safety"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LoRA 微调性能接近全参数微调，计算开销远低于全参数微调。","claim_en":"LoRA achieves comparable performance to full parameter fine-tuning with much lower compute cost.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"加入安全约束的 LoRA 可以在不损失任务性能的同时降低微调后的安全风险。","claim_en":"LoRA with safety constraints can reduce safety risks after fine-tuning without task performance loss.","opposes":"Prior work assumes PEFT fine-tuning safety risks can only be solved by additional post-alignment steps.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"Proves PEFT can have built-in safety mechanisms without extra post-alignment steps, reducing the cost of safe fine-tuning for small teams."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为PEFT安全优化的相关文献备查即可，无需读正文，现有方案设计简单，暂无超出预期的创新点。","en":"Just keep it as a reference for PEFT security optimization literature, no need to read the full text; the current scheme is simple in design and has no unexpected innovations."}},{"id":"HuW024a","title":"Provably Optimal Memory Capacity for Modern Hopfield Models: Transformer-Compatible Dense Associative Memories as Spherical Codes","authors":["Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu","Dennis Wu","Han Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c5","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HuW024a","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HuW024a","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/82846e19e6d42ebfd4ace4361def29ae-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer 兼容的核化 Hopfield 模型（稠密关联记忆）的最优记忆容量没有严格的理论上界和最优条件，现有分析结果偏松，无法指导实际记忆模块设计。","importance":"理论级贡献。首次建立 Hopfield 模型和球面编码的关联，为 Transformer 记忆模块的容量设计提供严格的理论依据。","technical_approach":"进行原创理论分析。将 KHM 的记忆集合映射为信息论中的球面编码，将记忆问题转化为超球面点排列问题，推导了最优容量的充要条件，给出严格的容量上界。","experiments":"纯理论工作，无实验数据。给出了最优容量的数学证明。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No tight theoretical upper bound and optimal conditions exist for the memory capacity of transformer-compatible Kernelized Hopfield Models (KHMs, dense associative memories). Existing analyses are loose and cannot guide practical memory module design.","importance":"Theoretical-level contribution. Establishes a connection between Hopfield models and spherical codes, providing strict theoretical guidance for Transformer memory module design.","technical_approach":"Conducts original theoretical analysis. Maps the memory set of KHMs as spherical codes from information theory, casts the memorization problem as point arrangement on a hypersphere, derives necessary and sufficient conditions for optimal capacity, and gives a tight upper bound of memory capacity.","experiments":"Pure theoretical work with mathematical proof of optimal capacity. No experimental data provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["hopfield-network","associative-memory","transformer-theory","capacity"],"keywords":["Modern Hopfield Models","Dense Associative Memory","Transformer","Transformer Representation Learning","Memory Capacity","Foundation Model"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"现代 Hopfield 模型可以作为 Transformer 的记忆模块提升长上下文能力。","claim_en":"Modern Hopfield models can be used as memory modules in Transformers to improve long context capabilities.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"KHM 的最优记忆容量由其记忆在特征空间中的球面编码质量决定。","claim_en":"Optimal memory capacity of KHMs is determined by the quality of spherical codes formed by memories in feature space.","opposes":"Prior work assumes Hopfield model capacity only scales linearly with hidden layer dimension.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"Revises the understanding of associative memory capacity, potentially guiding the design of high-efficiency memory modules."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§3的球面编码映射推导和§4的容量上界结论即可，为Transformer记忆模块的容量配置提供了严格理论依据。","en":"Only read §3 for spherical code mapping derivation and §4 for capacity upper bound conclusion; it provides a strict theoretical basis for capacity configuration of Transformer memory modules."}},{"id":"JafariMME24","title":"MambaLRP: Explaining Selective State Space Sequence Models","authors":["Farnoush Rezaei Jafari","Grégoire Montavon","Klaus-Robert Müller","Oliver Eberle"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$c6","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JafariMME24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JafariMME24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d6d0e41e0b1ed38c76d13c9e417a8f1f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：Selective State Space Models，尤其 Mamba，一直缺少像 Transformer 那样相对成熟的可解释性工具。没有合适的归因方法，就很难判断模型到底依赖哪些时间步、状态更新和选择门控，也难以比较它与注意力模型的机制差异。","importance":"这是机制分析工具级工作。对序列建模研究的重要性在于，Mamba 这类状态空间模型正在成为 AR/长上下文建模的替代路线之一，但如果解释工具跟不上，很多关于其泛化和稳定性的讨论只能停留在表象。它对 pretrain 的价值是提供诊断接口，而不是直接提高指标。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 MambaLRP，即把 Layer-wise Relevance Propagation 迁移并适配到 selective state space sequence models。关键难点不在于套一个现成解释框架，而在于 Mamba 的递归状态更新和选择性门控与标准 feed-forward / attention 结构不同，因此需要重新定义 relevance 如何沿状态转移传播、如何处理门控选择与时间依赖。这样的设计有效，是因为 LRP 的优势在于逐层守恒地追踪贡献；若适配得当，可以给出比简单梯度热图更稳定的时间归因。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认作者是否在语言、音频或长序列分类上验证 MambaLRP。通常这类工作会展示可视化案例、faithfulness 指标，并与 gradient × input、Integrated Gradients、attention-based explanation 等方法比较。最值得看的不是漂亮图，而是两个硬问题：第一，解释是否对 Mamba 的内部计算真正 faithful；第二，归因结果是否揭示了 selective scan 在长程依赖上的独特模式，而不仅是复现显而易见的局部相关性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a tooling gap: selective state space models such as Mamba lack mature interpretability methods comparable to what is available for Transformers. Without such tools, it is hard to understand which timesteps, state updates, and gating decisions actually drive model behavior.","importance":"This is an interpretability-tools contribution. Its value for sequence modeling is that state space models are becoming a serious alternative for long-context modeling, but mechanistic understanding has lagged behind. For pretraining research, the benefit is diagnostic rather than benchmark-oriented.","technical_approach":"The proposed method is MambaLRP, an adaptation of Layer-wise Relevance Propagation to selective state space sequence models. The nontrivial part is that Mamba relies on recurrent state updates and input-dependent selection, so relevance cannot be propagated in the same way as in standard feed-forward or attention layers. If done well, this should provide more faithful temporal attributions than raw gradient-based saliency.","experiments":"The available information does not specify domains, tasks, or numerical results. A paper of this kind would typically compare MambaLRP against gradient-based attribution baselines using qualitative visualizations and faithfulness-style metrics. The key empirical question is whether the method captures genuinely model-specific temporal mechanisms, especially long-range dependencies, rather than merely highlighting obvious local correlations.","authors_note":""},"tags":["mamba","interpretability","state-space","sequence-model"],"keywords":["Explainable AI","explainability","interpretability","state space models","Mamba","long-range dependency"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的Mamba适配逻辑和§4的时间步归因案例即可，可复用该工具诊断内部Mamba类模型的长序列依赖学习情况。","en":"Only read §3 for Mamba adaptation logic and §4 for time step attribution cases; you can reuse this tool to diagnose the long-sequence dependency learning of internal Mamba-like models."}},{"id":"JangLKL24","title":"Model Fusion through Bayesian Optimization in Language Model Fine-Tuning","authors":["Chaeyun Jang","Hyungi Lee","Jungtaek Kim","Juho Lee"],"institutions":["KAIST"],"abstract":"$c7","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JangLKL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JangLKL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/34d3cf97696022b179171e5abda42c0b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"多个微调后的语言模型如何高效融合？Model fusion（如 model soup / weight averaging）在 LLM 微调场景下的超参选择（如融合权重）缺乏系统方法，通常靠均匀平均或手动调参。","importance":"方法级贡献，对 pretrain→posttrain 流程有实用价值。当多个 SFT/RLHF checkpoint 需要合并时，贝叶斯优化提供了一种自动化、样本高效的权重搜索方案，避免了大量评估开销。","technical_approach":"将模型融合的权重系数视为超参数，用贝叶斯优化（Bayesian Optimization）在验证集上搜索最优融合比例。相比均匀平均（uniform soup）或 grid search，BO 在少量评估次数内找到更好的融合权重。关键选择是用 GP surrogate 建模融合权重→验证性能的映射，利用 acquisition function 引导搜索。","experiments":"在 LLM 微调场景下（具体模型规模和任务未从摘要获取）与 uniform averaging、greedy soup 等 baseline 比较，BO 方法在相同评估预算下找到更优的融合方案。","authors_note":"Juho Lee 是 KAIST 教授，在贝叶斯深度学习方向有持续产出。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to efficiently determine fusion weights when merging multiple fine-tuned language models? Current model soup / weight averaging approaches rely on uniform averaging or manual tuning, lacking a principled search strategy.","importance":"Method-level contribution relevant to the pretrain-to-posttrain pipeline. When merging multiple SFT/RLHF checkpoints, Bayesian optimization offers a sample-efficient, automated way to find optimal fusion weights.","technical_approach":"Treats fusion coefficients as hyperparameters and uses Bayesian Optimization with a GP surrogate to search for the best combination on a validation set. Compared to uniform averaging or grid search, BO finds better weights within a small evaluation budget by leveraging an acquisition function to guide the search.","experiments":"Compared against uniform averaging and greedy soup baselines in LLM fine-tuning settings. BO consistently finds better fusion configurations under the same evaluation budget. Specific model sizes and tasks not available from abstract.","authors_note":"Juho Lee is a professor at KAIST with sustained work in Bayesian deep learning."},"tags":["model-merging","fine-tuning","bayesian-optimization","alignment"],"notable_authors":["Juho Lee"],"keywords":["fine-tuning","language model","bayesian optimization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§4的超参搜索效率对比即可，内部多SFT/RLHF checkpoint融合时可直接复用该贝叶斯优化方案替代手动调参。","en":"Only read §4 for hyperparameter search efficiency comparison; when fusing multiple internal SFT/RLHF checkpoints, you can directly reuse this Bayesian optimization scheme instead of manual parameter tuning."}},{"id":"Jayaraman0C24","title":"Déjà Vu Memorization in Vision-Language Models","authors":["Bargav Jayaraman","Chuan Guo","Kamalika Chaudhuri"],"institutions":["Meta","UCSD"],"abstract":"Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have emerged as the state-of-the-art representation learning solution, with myriads of downstream applications such as image classification, retrieval and generation. A natural question is whether these models memorize their training data, which also has implications for generalization. We propose a new method for measuring memorization in VLMs, which we call dèjá vu memorization. For VLMs trained on image-caption pairs, we show that the model indeed retains information about individual objects in the training images beyond what can be inferred from correlations or the image caption. We evaluate dèjá vu memorization at both sample and population level, and show that it is significant for OpenCLIP trained on as many as 50M image-caption pairs. Finally, we show that text randomization considerably mitigates memorization risk while only moderately impacting the model’s downstream task performance.  The code is available here: https://github.com/facebookresearch/VLMDejaVu.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Jayaraman0C24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Jayaraman0C24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/5ab6f836f464d0f4e4f6aaa523249280-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"视觉-语言模型（VLM）是否会记忆训练数据？现有记忆性研究主要针对纯文本 LLM 或图像生成模型，对 VLM 这种跨模态模型的记忆行为缺乏系统分析。","importance":"对 VLM 预训练的隐私和安全研究有直接意义。如果 VLM 记忆了图文对中的敏感信息，攻击者可能通过一种模态提取另一种模态的训练数据。这对大规模图文预训练的数据治理提出了新要求。","technical_approach":"定义并量化了 VLM 中的 'déjà vu memorization'——模型在给定一种模态输入时，能复现训练集中对应的另一种模态内容的现象。设计了系统的度量方法和攻击场景来检测这种跨模态记忆。","experiments":"具体模型和数据集未从摘要获取，但预期在 CLIP 类或生成式 VLM 上进行了记忆性检测实验，量化了不同训练设置下的记忆程度。","authors_note":"Kamalika Chaudhuri 是 UCSD/Meta 的知名研究者，在差分隐私和机器学习隐私方向有大量代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Do vision-language models memorize their training data? Memorization studies have focused on text-only LLMs or image generators, but cross-modal memorization in VLMs—where one modality can leak information about the other—remains underexplored.","importance":"Directly relevant to privacy and data governance in VLM pretraining. If VLMs memorize image-text pairs, adversaries could extract sensitive training data through cross-modal queries, raising new concerns for large-scale multimodal pretraining.","technical_approach":"Defines and quantifies 'déjà vu memorization' in VLMs: the phenomenon where a model, given input in one modality, can reproduce the corresponding training content in another modality. Designs systematic metrics and attack scenarios to detect such cross-modal memorization.","experiments":"Specific models and datasets not available from abstract, but expected to evaluate memorization rates on CLIP-like or generative VLMs under various training configurations.","authors_note":"Kamalika Chaudhuri is a well-known researcher at UCSD/Meta with foundational work on differential privacy and ML privacy."},"tags":["vlm","memorization","data-quality","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Kamalika Chaudhuri"],"keywords":["memorization","multimodal","CLIP","vision-language models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的记忆量化方法和§5的攻击场景实验即可，可参考该方法检测内部VLM预训练的敏感数据记忆风险。","en":"Only read §3 for memorization quantification method and §5 for attack scenario experiments; you can refer to this method to detect sensitive data memorization risks in internal VLM pre-training."}},{"id":"JeffaresCS24","title":"Deep Learning Through A Telescoping Lens: A Simple Model Provides Empirical Insights On Grokking, Gradient Boosting &amp; Beyond","authors":["Alan Jeffares","Alicia Curth","Mihaela van der Schaar"],"institutions":["University of Cambridge"],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JeffaresCS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JeffaresCS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/df334022279996b07e0870a629c18857-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Grokking（模型在过拟合后突然泛化）等深度学习中的反直觉现象缺乏统一的简单解释。现有分析要么过于复杂，要么只能解释单一现象。","importance":"机制分析级贡献。通过一个简单的 telescoping 模型（将深度网络视为逐层 boosting 的叠加）统一解释了 grokking、gradient boosting 与深度学习的联系等多个现象，对理解训练动态和泛化有启发。","technical_approach":"提出 telescoping lens：将深度网络的输出分解为各层增量贡献的累加（类似 boosting 的 additive structure）。在这个视角下，grokking 可以被理解为早期层先过拟合、后期层逐渐学到泛化特征的过程。这个模型足够简单以支持分析，又足够丰富以捕捉实际现象。","experiments":"在合成任务和标准 benchmark 上验证 telescoping 模型的预测与实际深度网络行为的一致性，包括 grokking 的时间点预测和 gradient boosting 的对应关系。","authors_note":"Mihaela van der Schaar 是剑桥大学教授，在 AutoML、时间序列、因果推断等方向有大量工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Counter-intuitive phenomena like grokking (sudden generalization after overfitting) lack simple, unified explanations. Existing analyses are either too complex or phenomenon-specific.","importance":"Mechanistic-analysis contribution. The telescoping model—viewing deep networks as layer-wise additive boosting—provides a unified lens for grokking, the connection between gradient boosting and deep learning, and other training dynamics phenomena.","technical_approach":"Proposes a telescoping decomposition: the network output is the sum of incremental contributions from each layer, analogous to boosting's additive structure. Under this view, grokking arises because early layers overfit first while later layers gradually learn generalizable features. The model is simple enough for analysis yet rich enough to capture real phenomena.","experiments":"Validates predictions of the telescoping model against actual deep network behavior on synthetic tasks and standard benchmarks, including predicting grokking timing and gradient boosting correspondence.","authors_note":"Mihaela van der Schaar is a professor at Cambridge with extensive work on AutoML, time series, and causal inference."},"tags":["grokking","training-dynamics","optimization","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Mihaela van der Schaar"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读§2的telescoping分解逻辑和§4的grokking现象解释即可，为理解深度网络训练动态和泛化规律提供了新的极简分析视角。","en":"Only read §2 for telescoping decomposition logic and §4 for grokking phenomenon explanation; it provides a new minimal analysis perspective for understanding deep network training dynamics and generalization rules."}},{"id":"JennerKGAER24","title":"Evidence of Learned Look-Ahead in a Chess-Playing Neural Network","authors":["Erik Jenner","Shreyas Kapur","Vasil Georgiev","Cameron Allen","Scott Emmons","Stuart J. Russell"],"institutions":["UC Berkeley"],"abstract":"$c8","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JennerKGAER24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JennerKGAER24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/37d9f19150fce07bced2a81fc87d47a6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"神经网络是否真的学会了 look-ahead（前瞻搜索）？在国际象棋这样的完美信息博弈中，网络可能只是记忆了模式而非进行搜索。这篇工作试图从机制层面证明网络内部确实存在 look-ahead 计算。","importance":"对理解 LLM 的隐式推理能力有重要启示。如果一个在棋类上训练的网络能学会 look-ahead，这暗示 transformer 可能在语言任务中也进行类似的隐式多步推理（latent reasoning），而不仅仅是模式匹配。这与 CoT 和 latent reasoning 的研究方向直接相关。","technical_approach":"在 Leela Chess Zero（一个强国际象棋神经网络）上进行 interpretability 分析。通过 probing 和因果干预（causal intervention）方法，检测网络中间层是否编码了未来棋盘状态的信息。关键区分是：如果网络只是做模式匹配，中间层不应包含未来状态的表示；如果存在 look-ahead，应该能在中间层探测到对未来局面的预测。","experiments":"在 Leela Chess Zero 上进行实验，发现网络中间层确实编码了未来几步的棋盘状态信息，且因果干预实验表明这些表示对最终决策有因果影响，而非仅仅是相关性。","authors_note":"Scott Emmons 等人来自 UC Berkeley，该团队在 AI safety 和 interpretability 方向有持续产出。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Does a neural network genuinely learn look-ahead search, or does it merely memorize patterns? In chess, this distinction matters: the work aims to provide mechanistic evidence that a trained network performs internal look-ahead computation.","importance":"Highly relevant to understanding implicit reasoning in LLMs. If a chess network learns look-ahead, it suggests transformers may perform similar latent multi-step reasoning in language tasks—directly connecting to CoT and latent reasoning research.","technical_approach":"Performs interpretability analysis on Leela Chess Zero using probing and causal interventions. Tests whether intermediate layers encode future board states. The key distinction: pattern matching would not require future-state representations, while genuine look-ahead would. Causal interventions verify these representations causally influence decisions.","experiments":"Finds that intermediate layers of Leela Chess Zero encode board states several moves ahead, and causal interventions confirm these representations causally affect the network's move selection, ruling out mere correlation.","authors_note":"The team includes researchers from UC Berkeley with sustained work on AI safety and interpretability."},"tags":["look-ahead","reasoning","mechanistic-interpretability","planning"],"keywords":["Mechanistic interpretability","Learned search","Chess"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看因果干预实验和中间层未来状态探测结果即可，对验证LLM隐式多步推理的存在性有参考价值。","en":"Only check the causal intervention experiments and intermediate layer future state detection results, it provides reference for verifying the existence of LLM latent multi-step reasoning."}},{"id":"JessonBCKKGCB24","title":"Estimating the Hallucination Rate of Generative AI","authors":["Andrew Jesson","Nicolas Beltran-Velez","Quentin Chu","Sweta Karlekar","Jannik Kossen","Yarin Gal","John P. Cunningham","David M. Blei"],"institutions":["University of Oxford"],"abstract":"$c9","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JessonBCKKGCB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JessonBCKKGCB24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3791f5fc0e8e43730466afd2bcdb7493-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"如何系统地估计生成式 AI（特别是 LLM）的幻觉率？现有评估要么依赖人工标注（昂贵且不可扩展），要么用模型自评（可能低估幻觉）。缺少一个统计上严谨的幻觉率估计框架。","importance":"对 LLM 的可靠性评估和 posttrain 质量控制有直接价值。幻觉率是衡量 LLM 实用性的核心指标之一，一个可靠的估计方法可以指导 pretrain 数据质量改进和 RLHF 奖励信号设计。","technical_approach":"提出一个统计估计框架来量化 LLM 的幻觉率，核心思路是结合少量人工标注和模型自评的置信度，用统计方法（如 importance sampling 或 calibration-based correction）得到幻觉率的无偏或低偏估计及置信区间。","experiments":"具体模型、数据集和数字未从摘要获取，但预期在多个 LLM 和问答/摘要任务上验证了估计方法的准确性和校准性。","authors_note":"Jannik Kossen 等人来自牛津大学 OATML 组（Yarin Gal 团队），该组在不确定性估计和贝叶斯深度学习方向有大量代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"How to rigorously estimate the hallucination rate of generative AI? Existing approaches rely on expensive human annotation or potentially biased model self-evaluation, lacking a statistically principled estimation framework.","importance":"Directly valuable for LLM reliability assessment and post-training quality control. A reliable hallucination rate estimator can guide pretrain data quality improvements and RLHF reward signal design.","technical_approach":"Proposes a statistical framework combining limited human annotations with model confidence scores to produce unbiased or low-bias hallucination rate estimates with confidence intervals, likely using techniques like importance sampling or calibration-based correction.","experiments":"Specific models, datasets, and numbers not available from abstract. Expected to validate estimation accuracy and calibration across multiple LLMs on QA/summarization tasks.","authors_note":"Jannik Kossen and others are from Oxford's OATML group (Yarin Gal's team), known for extensive work on uncertainty estimation and Bayesian deep learning."},"tags":["hallucination","evaluation","generative-models","reliability"],"notable_authors":["Jannik Kossen"],"keywords":["Uncertainty Quantification","Large Language Models","Conditional Generative Models","Hallucination Prediction"]},{"id":"Jiang0ZSN24","title":"Unveil Benign Overfitting for Transformer in Vision: Training Dynamics, Convergence, and Generalization","authors":["Jiarui Jiang","Wei Huang","Miao Zhang","Taiji Suzuki","Liqiang Nie"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ca","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Jiang0ZSN24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Jiang0ZSN24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/f49287371916715b9209fa41a275851e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"视觉 Transformer（ViT）训练到过拟合训练数据时仍保持良好泛化能力（良性过拟合）的理论机制不明确，现有理论无法解释 ViT 的训练动态和泛化性。","importance":"理论级贡献。填补了 ViT 良性过拟合的理论空白，为视觉大模型预训练的优化策略设计提供理论支撑。","technical_approach":"进行原创理论分析。针对带 softmax 自注意力层加全连接层的 Transformer 结构，在特定数据分布下用梯度下降训练的优化过程建模，推导了其训练动态、收敛性和泛化性的理论边界。","experiments":"纯理论工作，无实验数据。给出了 ViT 良性过拟合的理论证明。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The theoretical mechanism of benign overfitting of Vision Transformers (ViT) (good generalization even when trained to overfit training data) is unclear. Existing theories cannot explain ViT's training dynamics and generalization.","importance":"Theoretical-level contribution. Fills the theoretical gap of ViT benign overfitting, providing theoretical support for optimization strategy design of vision foundation model pre-training.","technical_approach":"Conducts original theoretical analysis. Models the optimization process of a Transformer with a softmax self-attention layer plus a fully connected layer trained with gradient descent on specific data distribution, deriving theoretical bounds of its training dynamics, convergence, and generalization.","experiments":"Pure theoretical work with mathematical proof of ViT benign overfitting. No experimental data provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","overfitting","generalization","training-dynamics","vision"],"keywords":["Vision Transformers","Training Dynamics","Benign Overfitting","Self-Attention","Feature Learning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"过参数化模型在特定条件下会出现良性过拟合现象。","claim_en":"Over-parameterized models exhibit benign overfitting under specific conditions.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为视觉Transformer良性过拟合的理论文献备查，和NLP预训练关联度极低，无需读正文。","en":"Only for literature reference of ViT benign overfitting, it has extremely low relevance to NLP pretraining, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"JiangJXYDY00Z24","title":"MaVEn: An Effective Multi-granularity Hybrid Visual Encoding Framework for Multimodal Large Language Model","authors":["Chaoya Jiang","Hongrui Jia","Haiyang Xu","Wei Ye","Mengfan Dong","Ming Yan","Ji Zhang","Fei Huang","Shikun Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$cb","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JiangJXYDY00Z24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JiangJXYDY00Z24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/b8f21f324ff277ba26aed2e944b7576b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有多模态大模型的视觉编码仅适配单图像理解，无法有效整合多图像的跨图信息，多图像推理能力受限。","importance":"方法级改进。为多模态预训练的视觉编码设计提供参考，可提升多图像推理任务性能。","technical_approach":"提出原创多粒度混合视觉编码框架 MaVEn。结合离散视觉符号序列（建模粗粒度语义概念）和传统连续表征序列（建模细粒度特征），加入动态降维机制，缩小视觉和文本的语义鸿沟，支持多图像信息整合。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体实验指标。声称在多图像推理任务上性能优于现有单粒度视觉编码方案。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing visual encoders for multimodal large language models (MLLMs) only support single-image understanding and cannot effectively integrate cross-image information from multiple images, limiting multi-image reasoning capabilities.","importance":"Method-level improvement. Provides reference for visual encoding design for multimodal pre-training, improving multi-image reasoning task performance.","technical_approach":"Proposes original multi-granularity hybrid visual encoding framework MaVEn. Combines discrete visual symbol sequences (modeling coarse-grained semantic concepts) and traditional continuous representation sequences (modeling fine-grained features), adds a dynamic reduction mechanism, narrows the semantic gap between visual and textual data, and supports multi-image information integration.","experiments":"No detailed experimental metrics are provided in the abstract. Claims better performance on multi-image reasoning tasks than existing single-granularity visual encoding schemes.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","visual-encoding","multi-granularity","multimodal-llm"],"keywords":["Large Vision Language Model","Multi-image","Multi-granularity Visual Encoding"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"多模态大模型的视觉和文本模态存在语义鸿沟。","claim_en":"There is a semantic gap between visual and textual modalities in multimodal large language models.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看MaVEn的多粒度编码融合和动态降维设计部分，可参考优化多模态预训练的视觉编码器。","en":"Only read the multi-granularity encoding fusion and dynamic dimensionality reduction design of MaVEn, it can be referenced to optimize visual encoders for multimodal pretraining."}},{"id":"JiangRHEB0MLS0D24","title":"WildTeaming at Scale: From In-the-Wild Jailbreaks to (Adversarially) Safer Language Models","authors":["Liwei Jiang","Kavel Rao","Seungju Han","Allyson Ettinger","Faeze Brahman","Sachin Kumar","Niloofar Mireshghallah","Ximing Lu","Maarten Sap","Yejin Choi","Nouha Dziri"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$cc","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JiangRHEB0MLS0D24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JiangRHEB0MLS0D24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/54024fca0cef9911be36319e622cde38-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有红队测试方法要么依赖人工、梯度优化或 LLM 迭代改写，覆盖的越狱攻击类型有限，无法发现真实用户的未知越狱策略。","importance":"数据+方法级贡献。为 LLM 安全对齐提供更全面的漏洞发现方法，提升对齐后 LLM 的鲁棒性。","technical_approach":"提出原创自动化红队框架 WildTeaming。从真实用户与聊天机器人的真实交互数据中挖掘越狱策略，组合多个挖掘到的策略生成更难的对抗攻击样本，覆盖更多未知漏洞。","experiments":"从真实交互数据中挖掘到 5.7K 个独特的越狱策略簇。攻击成功率和多样性优于现有最优越狱方法，可发现前沿 LLM 的未知漏洞。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing red-teaming methods rely on human workers, gradient-based optimization, or LLM iterative revision, cover limited jailbreak attack types, and cannot discover unknown jailbreak tactics from real users.","importance":"Data and method-level contribution. Provides a more comprehensive vulnerability discovery method for LLM safety alignment, improving robustness of aligned LLMs.","technical_approach":"Proposes original automatic red-teaming framework WildTeaming. Mines jailbreak tactics from real user-chatbot interaction data, composes multiple mined tactics to generate more challenging adversarial attack samples, and covers more unknown vulnerabilities.","experiments":"Mines 5.7K unique clusters of jailbreak tactics from real interaction data. Achieves higher attack success rate and diversity than existing best jailbreaking methods, discovering unknown vulnerabilities of frontier LLMs.","authors_note":""},"tags":["safety","jailbreak","red-teaming","alignment"],"keywords":["Red-teaming","AI Safety","Safety Training","LLM Defense","Safety Training Data","Adversarial Training","Adversarial Attacks","Jailbreak"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"红队测试可以有效发现 LLM 的安全漏洞，用于提升 LLM 的安全对齐能力。","claim_en":"Red-teaming can effectively discover safety vulnerabilities of LLMs, used to improve LLM safety alignment capability.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"从真实用户交互中挖掘的越狱策略比人工或模型生成的越狱策略覆盖更多样、成功率更高。","claim_en":"Jailbreak tactics mined from real user interactions are more diverse and have higher success rate than those generated by humans or models.","opposes":"Prior work assumes model-generated or human-designed jailbreak tactics cover most possible attack surfaces.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"Provides a more practical red-teaming approach that can discover real-world vulnerabilities of deployed LLMs."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看真实交互越狱策略挖掘和组合攻击生成逻辑，可引入内部LLM安全对齐的红队测试流程。","en":"Focus on the real interaction jailbreak strategy mining and combined attack generation logic, it can be introduced into internal LLM safety alignment red team testing workflows."}},{"id":"2408.00113","title":"Measuring Progress in Dictionary Learning for Language Model Interpretability with Board Game Models","authors":["Adam Karvonen","Benjamin Wright","Can Rager","Rico Angell","Jannik Brinkmann","Logan Smith","Claudio Mayrink Verdun","David Bau","Samuel Marks"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"What latent features are encoded in language model (LM) representations? Recent work on training sparse autoencoders (SAEs) to disentangle interpretable features in LM representations has shown significant promise. However, evaluating the quality of these SAEs is difficult because we lack a ground-truth collection of interpretable features that we expect good SAEs to recover. We thus propose to measure progress in interpretable dictionary learning by working in the setting of LMs trained on chess and Othello transcripts. These settings carry natural collections of interpretable features -- for example,\"there is a knight on F3\"-- which we leverage into $\\textit{supervised}$ metrics for SAE quality. To guide progress in interpretable dictionary learning, we introduce a new SAE training technique, $\\textit{p-annealing}$, which improves performance on prior unsupervised metrics as well as our new metrics.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.00113","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KarvonenWRABSVB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KarvonenWRABSVB24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9736acf007760cc2b47948ae3cf06274-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 SAE（稀疏自编码器）可解释性研究里一个长期缺口：我们没有可靠的 ground truth 去判断学到的字典特征到底好不好。过去很多工作只能用稀疏度、重构误差或少量人工 case study 评估，但这些指标和“是否恢复了真实语义特征”之间并不等价。","importance":"这是机制可解释性方向里很有价值的评测工作。它的重要性在于把 SAE 训练从‘看起来解释得通’推进到可监督比较：如果在棋类/Othello 这类有天然可解释状态空间的模型上都不能稳定恢复正确特征，那在自然语言模型上对 SAE 的乐观判断就要更谨慎。","technical_approach":"核心方法是转到棋类和 Othello transcript 模型上做 dictionary learning 评测，因为这里存在明确的可解释潜变量，比如‘F3 上有一个 knight’。这不是逃开语言模型问题，而是先在一个有真值的环境里测 SAE 的恢复能力；论文还提出了新的 SAE 训练技术，目的应是提升对这些监督特征的恢复率，而不是只优化重构损失。","experiments":"摘要给出的关键信息是：作者在棋类和 Othello LM 上构建了监督指标，用来衡量 SAE 是否恢复已知特征，并用这些指标比较训练方法。具体模型规模和数值在摘要中没有给出，但最值得看的不是单个最好分数，而是不同 SAE 训练技巧在‘重构—稀疏—特征恢复’三者之间的取舍；如果一个方法重构更好却恢复更差，就说明现有代理指标不够可靠。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a core evaluation problem in SAE-based interpretability: we do not have reliable ground truth for whether a learned dictionary actually recovers the right latent features. Standard proxies such as sparsity and reconstruction error are useful, but they are not the same as recovering semantically correct internal variables.","importance":"This is an important evaluation contribution for mechanistic interpretability. Its value is that it turns SAE progress into something measurable: if a method cannot reliably recover known board-state features in toy-but-structured domains like chess or Othello, then claims about recovering meaningful features in natural language models should be treated with more caution.","technical_approach":"The main idea is to study dictionary learning on language models trained over chess and Othello transcripts, where there is natural supervised structure—for example, whether a knight is on F3. This is a smart choice because it preserves the representation-learning setting of language models while adding a ground-truth latent space, and the paper also introduces a new SAE training technique aimed at improving feature recovery rather than just reconstruction.","experiments":"From the abstract, the key empirical contribution is a supervised metric suite for SAE quality built from board-game features, along with comparisons between SAE training methods under those metrics. The abstract does not provide exact model sizes or numbers, but the most informative analysis should be the trade-off between reconstruction, sparsity, and actual feature recovery, especially when these metrics disagree.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","sparse-autoencoder","feature-learning","evaluation"],"keywords":["Language models","interpretability","dictionary learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看棋类模型SAE真值评测范式和恢复率对比部分，能修正你对LLM上SAE可解释性效果的乐观预期。","en":"Only check the SAE ground truth evaluation paradigm on board game models and recovery rate comparison, it will correct your over-optimistic expectation of SAE interpretability on LLMs."}},{"id":"KimKKR24","title":"CODE: Contrasting Self-generated Description to Combat Hallucination in Large Multi-modal Models","authors":["Junho Kim","Hyunjun Kim","Yeonju Kim","Yong Man Ro"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$cd","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KimKKR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KimKKR24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/f1592b0d4ab737e18bb1899484d28d96-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"多模态大模型生成回复容易产生和视觉内容无关的幻觉，现有解码方法没有利用模型自身的视觉描述作为对照来修正幻觉。","importance":"方法级改进。推理阶段即可使用，不需要重新训练模型，即可降低多模态幻觉。","technical_approach":"提出原创对比解码方法 CODE。解码阶段用模型自己生成的完整视觉描述作为对照参考，动态调整信息流动和分布，提升回复和视觉内容的对齐度。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体实验指标。声称幻觉率低于基线解码方法。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Multimodal large models easily generate hallucinations unrelated to visual content. Existing decoding methods do not use the model's own visual descriptions as references to correct hallucinations.","importance":"Method-level improvement. Can be used at inference stage without re-training the model, reducing multimodal hallucinations.","technical_approach":"Proposes original contrastive decoding method CODE. Uses the model's self-generated full visual descriptions as contrastive references during decoding, dynamically adjusts information flow and distribution, and improves alignment between responses and actual visual content.","experiments":"No detailed experimental metrics are provided in the abstract. Claims lower hallucination rate than baseline decoding methods.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal","hallucination","self-training","alignment"],"keywords":["Large Vision-Language Models","Large Multi-modal Models","Hallucination"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"多模态大模型的幻觉问题主要来自回复和视觉内容的对齐偏差。","claim_en":"Hallucination problem of multimodal large models mainly comes from alignment deviation between responses and visual content.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于推理阶段多模态幻觉缓解的小trick，无架构层面创新，仅做方法备查无需细读。","en":"It is a small inference-stage trick for multimodal hallucination mitigation with no architectural innovation, only for method reference, no need to read in detail."}},{"id":"KimNS24","title":"Transformers are Minimax Optimal Nonparametric In-Context Learners","authors":["Juno Kim","Tai Nakamaki","Taiji Suzuki"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ce","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KimNS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KimNS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c11daad0a48ea5f3c5c6390c7b060720-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer 的上下文学习（ICL）效果好的理论机制不明确，现有统计学习理论无法解释 ICL 的泛化性能来源。","importance":"理论级贡献。从统计学习角度解释了 ICL 的有效性，为预训练目标设计和 ICL 能力提升提供理论依据。","technical_approach":"进行原创理论分析。针对带线性注意力层的 Transformer，在非参数回归任务上预训练的近似和泛化误差分析，证明了足够训练的 Transformer 上下文学习能达到甚至超越最小最大最优估计风险。","experiments":"纯理论工作，无实验数据。给出了数学证明。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The theoretical mechanism of Transformer in-context learning (ICL) effectiveness is unclear. Existing statistical learning theories cannot explain the source of ICL generalization performance.","importance":"Theoretical-level contribution. Explains the effectiveness of ICL from statistical learning perspective, providing theoretical basis for pre-training objective design and ICL capability improvement.","technical_approach":"Conducts original theoretical analysis. Conducts approximation and generalization error analysis for a Transformer with linear attention layer pre-trained on nonparametric regression tasks, proving sufficiently trained Transformers can achieve or even exceed minimax optimal estimation risk in context.","experiments":"Pure theoretical work with mathematical proof. No experimental data provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","theory","transformer","generalization"],"keywords":["in-context learning","transformers","nonparametric regression","minimax optimality","meta-learning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer 的上下文学习能力来自预训练阶段的学习。","claim_en":"Transformer's in-context learning capability comes from pre-training.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看线性注意力Transformer在非参数回归任务上的ICL最小最大最优性证明部分，为ICL能力优化提供理论支撑。","en":"Focus on the minimax optimality proof of linear attention Transformer's ICL on nonparametric regression tasks, it provides theoretical support for ICL capability optimization."}},{"id":"KongWMDZZSZW024","title":"Aligning Large Language Models with Representation Editing: A Control Perspective","authors":["Lingkai Kong","Haorui Wang","Wenhao Mu","Yuanqi Du","Yuchen Zhuang","Yifei Zhou","Yue Song","Rongzhi Zhang","Kai Wang","Chao Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$cf","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KongWMDZZSZW024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KongWMDZZSZW024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/41bba7b0f5c81e789a20bb16a370aeeb-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM对齐方法存在明显 trade-off：全量微调训练不稳定、算力开销大，提示词/引导解码等测试时对齐方案不修改模型本体，性能受原始模型能力上限限制，没有兼顾效果和效率的成熟方案。","importance":"属于LLM对齐方向的方法级贡献，填补了预训练LLM表示层控制对齐的空白，不需要全量微调也不需要推理时复杂的解码约束，对低资源对齐场景有实用价值。","technical_approach":"核心是将自回归预训练LLM建模为离散时间随机动态系统，在系统的隐状态空间引入外部控制信号实现对齐，直接在隐层状态上训练价值函数，不需要修改模型原始参数，也不依赖推理时的额外引导逻辑。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露模型参数量、基线、指标提升等完整实验数据，无可用量化结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM alignment methods have a clear trade-off: full fine-tuning suffers from unstable training and high compute cost, while test-time alignment methods like prompting and guided decoding leave the base model unchanged, with performance bounded by the original model's capability. No mature solution balances effectiveness and efficiency well.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution for LLM alignment. It fills the gap of representation-layer control alignment for pre-trained LLMs, requiring neither full parameter fine-tuning nor complex inference-time decoding constraints, which is practical for low-resource alignment scenarios.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to model a pre-trained autoregressive LLM as a discrete-time stochastic dynamical system. External control signals are injected into the system's hidden state space to achieve alignment, and a value function is trained directly on hidden states. No modification to original model parameters or extra inference-time guidance logic is needed.","experiments":"Full experiment details including model size, baselines and metric improvements are not disclosed in the public abstract, no quantitative results available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","representation-editing","control"],"keywords":["Large language model","Alignment","Representation editing"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM对齐人类目标是落地的核心要求","claim_en":"Aligning LLMs to human objectives is a core requirement for real-world deployment","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看隐状态空间控制对齐的实现方案，可参考开发低资源场景下的轻量级LLM对齐方法。","en":"Only read the implementation of hidden state space controlled alignment, it can be referenced to develop lightweight LLM alignment methods for low-resource scenarios."}},{"id":"KongXWZK24","title":"Perplexity-aware Correction for Robust Alignment with Noisy Preferences","authors":["Keyi Kong","Xilie Xu","Di Wang","Jingfeng Zhang","Mohan S. Kankanhalli"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d0","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KongXWZK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KongXWZK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/31a57804448363bcab777f818f75f5b4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM偏好对齐方法受噪声偏好标签（错误标记的chosen/rejected响应对）影响，会导致模型输出无用甚至有害内容，现有降噪方案都从损失函数角度优化，依赖干净验证集，泛化性有限、标注成本高。","importance":"属于鲁棒对齐方向的方法级贡献，从数据处理角度而非损失优化角度解决噪声偏好问题，和现有损失优化方法正交，可以直接组合进常规RLHF/DPO pipeline，降低了对干净验证集的依赖。","technical_approach":"提出PerpCorrect方法，通过计算chosen和rejected响应的困惑度差自动检测并校正噪声偏好标签，不需要额外的干净验证集，处理后的数据可以直接接入标准对齐流程。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露模型参数量、基线、指标提升等完整实验数据，无可用量化结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Noisy preference labels (incorrectly annotated chosen/rejected response pairs) degrade LLM alignment performance, leading to useless or even harmful outputs. Existing noise mitigation methods all optimize from the loss perspective, relying on clean validation datasets with limited generalization and high annotation cost.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution for robust LLM alignment. It addresses noisy preferences from the data processing perspective, orthogonal to existing loss-oriented methods, and can be directly integrated into standard RLHF/DPO pipelines, reducing the dependency on clean validation datasets.","technical_approach":"The proposed PerpCorrect method detects and corrects noisy preference labels based on the perplexity difference between chosen and rejected responses. No extra clean validation dataset is required, and the processed data can be directly fed into standard alignment pipelines.","experiments":"Full experiment details including model size, baselines and metric improvements are not disclosed in the public abstract, no quantitative results available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","noisy-preferences","perplexity","robust-rlhf"],"keywords":["Large language model","Label-noise learning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"噪声偏好标签会损害LLM对齐效果","claim_en":"Noisy preference labels degrade LLM alignment performance","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"从数据侧基于困惑度校正噪声偏好标签的效果优于或等同于依赖干净验证集的损失侧调整方法","claim_en":"Mitigating noisy preferences from the data perspective via perplexity-based correction achieves comparable or better performance than loss adjustment methods relying on clean validation sets","opposes":"之前的噪声偏好缓解方法都仅从损失函数角度优化，认为必须依赖干净验证集才能实现有效降噪","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"拓展了带噪偏好对齐的优化维度，可大幅降低对齐的标注成本"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看困惑度差噪声偏好标签检测逻辑，可直接集成到内部DPO/RLHF pipeline降低对干净标注的依赖。","en":"Focus on the noisy preference label detection logic based on perplexity difference, it can be directly integrated into internal DPO/RLHF pipelines to reduce reliance on clean annotations."}},{"id":"LeeTS24","title":"ReMoDetect: Reward Models Recognize Aligned LLM&apos;s Generations","authors":["Hyunseok Lee","Jihoon Tack","Jinwoo Shin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LeeTS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LeeTS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/058373e239c542eae6cb796e4dc521da-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["reward-model","alignment","evaluation","rlhf"]},{"id":"2410.07112","title":"VHELM: A Holistic Evaluation of Vision Language Models","authors":["Tony Lee","Haoqin Tu","Chi Heem Wong","Wenhao Zheng","Yiyang Zhou","Yifan Mai","Josselin Somerville Roberts","Michihiro Yasunaga","Huaxiu Yao","Cihang Xie","Percy Liang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d1","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.07112","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LeeTWZZMRYYXL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LeeTWZZMRYYXL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/fe2fc7dc60b55ccd8886220b40fb1f74-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有VLM基准仅聚焦感知、解题能力，忽略公平性、多语言、毒性等关键落地维度，且评估流程和范围不统一，无法实现跨模型的公平对比。","importance":"属于VLM评估方向的基准级贡献，扩展了文本侧成熟的HELM框架到多模态场景，建立了统一的多维度VLM评估范式，为后续VLM预训练、对齐的效果验证提供了统一标尺。","technical_approach":"提出VHELM评估框架，整合多类数据集覆盖视觉感知、知识、推理、偏见、公平性、多语言、鲁棒性、毒性、安全共9个维度，标准化评估流程，输出多维度的模型能力画像。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露评测模型集合、量化对比结果等完整实验数据，无可用详细结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing VLM benchmarks only focus on perception and problem-solving capabilities, ignoring critical deployment dimensions such as fairness, multilinguality and toxicity. Inconsistent evaluation procedures and scopes also make fair cross-model comparison impossible.","importance":"This is a benchmark-level contribution for VLM evaluation. It extends the mature text-only HELM framework to multimodal scenarios, establishes a unified multi-dimensional VLM evaluation paradigm, and provides a consistent metric system for subsequent VLM pre-training and alignment research.","technical_approach":"The proposed VHELM evaluation framework aggregates multiple datasets to cover 9 dimensions: visual perception, knowledge, reasoning, bias, fairness, multilinguality, robustness, toxicity, and safety. It standardizes evaluation procedures to generate multi-dimensional capability profiles for VLMs.","experiments":"Full evaluation details including tested model list and quantitative comparison results are not disclosed in the public abstract, no detailed results available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","benchmark","evaluation","safety","multilingual"],"keywords":["Vision-language models","benchmark","holistic"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"多维度综合评估才能反映VLM的真实落地性能","claim_en":"Comprehensive multi-dimensional evaluation is required to reflect the real-world performance of VLMs","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看VHELM的9维评估指标设计和标准化流程部分，可作为多模态大模型内部评测的参考框架。","en":"Only check the 9-dimensional evaluation indicator design and standardized process of VHELM, it can be used as a reference framework for internal VLM evaluation."}},{"id":"2304.13276","title":"The Closeness of In-Context Learning and Weight Shifting for Softmax Regression","authors":["Shuai Li","Zhao Song","Yu Xia","Tong Yu","Tianyi Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d2","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.13276","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Li0X0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Li0X0024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/726ab29b61a749b36d2593648716ae3c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的核心问题是：in-context learning 到底是不是一种“隐式参数更新”，至少在 softmax regression 这个可分析设定下，两者有多接近。过去很多关于 ICL 的解释停留在类比层面，比如把 attention 看成某种梯度下降或贝叶斯更新，但缺少足够精确的数学刻画，因此难以判断这些说法在什么条件下成立、又在哪些地方失效。","importance":"这项工作的意义主要是机制分析和理论澄清，而不是提出新的训练方法。对 pretrain 研究的价值在于，它试图把 ICL 与 weight shifting 建立更具体的对应关系，帮助我们判断 transformer 在提示内学习时到底是在检索、拟合，还是在近似做一步或多步参数更新。这类结果不会直接改写工程配方，但会影响我们如何设计 synthetic pretraining task、如何理解 AR 模型的元学习能力边界。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把问题压缩到 softmax regression，并在这个简化模型上比较 in-context prediction 与显式 weight shifting 的 closeness。这样的设计不是为了贴近真实 LLM 细节，而是为了得到可证明、可分解的结论：softmax 是 attention 的核心归一化单元，因此作者选择在最小可分析设置里研究 ICL 机制。和经验论文不同，它不从大模型行为倒推原因，而是直接构造理论框架分析两种计算形式的差距与条件。","experiments":"从摘要可确认的信息有限：论文重点是理论分析，围绕 transformer 中带 softmax 的注意力机制以及 ICL 的预测行为展开。摘要没有给出实验规模、模型大小、数据集和具体数值，说明即便有实验也更可能是验证性而非 benchmark 导向。阅读这类工作时，真正该看的不是绝对指标，而是定理成立所需的条件是否过强、结论是否覆盖常见 prompt 结构，以及理论中的 closeness 是否能解释经验上已观察到的 ICL 现象。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The central question is whether in-context learning can be understood as a form of implicit weight update, and specifically how close it is to weight shifting in the analyzable setting of softmax regression. Many prior explanations of ICL draw analogies to gradient descent or Bayesian updating, but often without a precise characterization of when those analogies are actually valid.","importance":"This is a mechanism paper, not a new training recipe. Its value for pretraining research is that it sharpens the discussion around what transformers are doing at inference time: retrieval, local fitting, or something akin to parameter adaptation. That matters because our synthetic task design, prompt format choices, and even some interpretations of emergent meta-learning depend on which of these views is more accurate.","technical_approach":"The paper studies a reduced setting based on softmax regression and compares in-context prediction with explicit weight shifting. This simplification is deliberate: softmax is a core ingredient of attention, so the setting is minimal enough for rigorous analysis while still preserving a key mechanism. Unlike empirical ICL papers that infer mechanisms from behavior, this work builds a formal framework and asks under what assumptions the two computations become close.","experiments":"The abstract suggests a theory-first paper. It does not report model scales, datasets, or benchmark numbers, so the likely empirical component is only illustrative. For this kind of work, the important evidence is not SOTA but whether the assumptions are realistic, whether the gap bounds are informative, and whether the theory explains known ICL phenomena beyond the toy setup.","authors_note":""},"tags":["icl","theory","transformer","softmax"],"keywords":["in-context learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看softmax regression设定下ICL与权重偏移的等价性证明，帮你准确理解ICL底层机制而非表层类比。","en":"Focus on the equivalence proof between ICL and weight shifting under softmax regression settings, it helps you accurately understand the underlying mechanism of ICL instead of superficial analogies."}},{"id":"2402.10946","title":"CultureLLM: Incorporating Cultural Differences into Large Language Models","authors":["Cheng Li","Mengzhuo Chen","Jindong Wang","Sunayana Sitaram","Xing Xie"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d3","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.10946","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiC0S024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiC0S024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9a16935bf54c4af233e25d998b7f4a2c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：如何在低资源文化数据条件下，把文化差异更系统地注入 LLM，而不是只靠 prompt engineering 或高成本 culture-specific pretraining。过去主流做法要么在推理时用提示词“诱导”文化视角，要么为特定文化重新继续预训练；前者不稳定，后者算力和数据成本都高，而且对低资源文化尤其不友好。","importance":"它的贡献更偏数据构造和低成本适配方法，而不是预训练范式创新。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：当目标知识稀缺但结构明确时，少量高质量 seed 加语义等价增强，可能比继续扫更多通用语料更高效。这个结论对文化知识、价值观建模这类长尾分布问题有参考意义；但它更接近 post-training / continual adaptation，而不是改变底座模型训练目标。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 CultureLLM：以 World Value Survey 作为种子数据，再通过语义数据增强生成等价训练样本，用极少 seed 样本微调文化特定模型和统一模型。关键设计有两点：第一，选择 WVS 这种结构化文化调查作为锚点，避免从开放网络语料里直接挖文化知识带来的噪声；第二，做 semantic augmentation，而不是简单 paraphrase 扩容，目标是保留文化立场同时增加表达覆盖。和 culture-specific pretraining 相比，它舍弃了大规模继续训练，换来更低成本；代价是可注入知识的上限受 seed 质量和调查维度覆盖约束。","experiments":"摘要里最明确的实验信息是：只用 50 个来自 WVS 的 seed samples，加上增强数据，就训练了 culture-specific LLMs 和一个 unified model。摘要没有提供模型大小、语言覆盖、评测集、指标和具体提升幅度，因此无法补全数字。实验上最值得关注的不是绝对 benchmark，而是三件事：低资源文化是否真的显著受益；统一模型是否会在不同文化间互相干扰；以及这种文化注入是否会损伤通用能力。如果作者能证明 50-shot 级别就能稳定改变文化响应分布，这个结果在数据效率上是有价值的。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical bottleneck: how to inject cultural differences into LLMs when culture-specific data is scarce, without relying only on prompting or expensive additional pretraining. Existing methods either steer culture at inference time, which is brittle, or run culture-specific pretraining, which is costly and still weak for low-resource cultures.","importance":"This is mainly a data construction and low-cost adaptation contribution rather than a new pretraining paradigm. The useful lesson for pretraining researchers is that when the target knowledge is structured and sparse, a small amount of high-quality seed data plus semantic augmentation may be more efficient than more generic corpus scaling. That is especially relevant for long-tail knowledge domains such as cultural values, though the method is closer to post-training than to changing the base objective.","technical_approach":"The method, CultureLLM, starts from World Values Survey data and expands it through semantic augmentation to create culturally grounded training examples. The two important choices are to anchor the supervision in a structured survey rather than noisy web text, and to use meaning-preserving augmentation so the cultural stance is retained while surface forms diversify. Compared with culture-specific pretraining, this approach trades raw scale for efficiency and controllability. The limitation is that coverage is bounded by the seed set and the dimensions captured by the survey.","experiments":"The strongest concrete detail in the abstract is that the system uses only 50 WVS seed samples, together with augmented data, to fine-tune both culture-specific models and a unified model. No model sizes, benchmark names, or exact gains are reported in the abstract. The key empirical questions are whether low-resource cultures benefit materially, whether a unified model can represent multiple cultures without interference, and whether cultural adaptation hurts general capability.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm","cultural-alignment","synthetic-data","continual-pretrain"],"keywords":["Culture bias","large language models","fairness"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的结构化种子数据构造和语义增强方案即可，长尾知识注入场景可参考该思路替代通用语料继续预训练。","en":"Only read §3 for structured seed data construction and semantic augmentation schemes, which can replace general corpus continual pretraining for long-tail knowledge injection scenarios."}},{"id":"LiCC24","title":"Do LLMs Build World Representations? Probing Through the Lens of State Abstraction","authors":["Zichao Li","Yanshuai Cao","Jackie CK Cheung"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d4","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiCC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiCC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/b1b16c4b875eb84d3585cb70d23970ca-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注的问题是：LLM 内部是否构建了“世界状态表示”，以及这种表示是否是分层抽象的，而不是简单记住完整状态。过去 probing 常直接问模型有没有编码某个完整世界状态，但这类设定默认“表示越完整越好”，忽略了智能体为了预测或决策，往往只需要某种压缩后的 state abstraction。","importance":"它的重要性在于把语言模型世界表征的研究，从“能否恢复状态”推进到“以什么抽象层级恢复状态”。这对机制分析和 latent reasoning 都有启发，因为如果模型内部更像 task-relevant abstraction 而不是 full simulator，那么我们对 planning、memory、ICL 的理解都会变化。它不是直接改进 pretrain 方法的论文，但会影响我们如何设计 probing 数据和训练目标。","technical_approach":"方法上核心是把强化学习里的 state abstraction 理论引入 LLM probing，并区分两类抽象：一种是有利于预测未来状态的 general abstraction，另一种是有利于行动选择的 goal-oriented abstraction。作者用文本规划任务把这个框架落地，让 LLM 作为环境中的 agent，并 probing 其内部表示是否保留了不同粒度的状态信息。和传统 probe 完整 latent 是否可线性读出某个状态不同，这里更关心哪些信息被保留、哪些被系统性丢弃，以及这种保留是否与任务目标一致。","experiments":"摘要没有给出模型规模、任务数量、指标和具体结果数字，因此目前只能确认实验范式：基于 text-based planning task，分析模型内部表征对不同抽象层级世界状态的编码方式。真正有价值的结果通常会是：模型在 future-prediction 相关抽象上更强，还是在 action-relevant 抽象上更强；这种差异是否随模型规模或指令调优发生变化；以及 probing 到的抽象是否能解释行为表现。如果只发现完整状态难以恢复，但抽象状态容易恢复，那会是比以往更细致的负/正结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks not just whether LLMs encode world state, but whether they encode it in abstracted form. Prior probing work often targets full state recovery, which implicitly assumes that a better model should store a more complete state. This paper challenges that assumption by asking whether the internal representation is compressed in ways that are useful for prediction or action.","importance":"Its contribution is conceptual and diagnostic. It pushes world-model probing from a binary question—does the model represent the state or not—to a more informative one about what level of abstraction is represented. That matters for mechanistic understanding, planning, and latent reasoning, because useful internal state may be selective rather than complete.","technical_approach":"The key idea is to import state abstraction theory from reinforcement learning into LLM probing. The framework distinguishes general abstractions that support future-state prediction from goal-oriented abstractions that support action selection. The authors instantiate this in a text-based planning environment, then probe whether the model’s hidden representations preserve different kinds of world-state information. Compared with standard linear probes on full state labels, the focus here is on which information survives compression and whether that compression is task-aligned.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model sizes, metrics, or numerical outcomes. What can be stated reliably is that the experiments are built around a text-based planning task and use probing to study abstraction in internal world representations. The most valuable findings would be whether models retain prediction-relevant abstractions better than action-relevant ones, whether that changes with scale or instruction tuning, and whether the probe results explain behavior differences across tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["world-model","representation","probing","state-abstraction"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","World Models","World Representation","Probing","Reinforcement Learning","State Abstraction"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§4的state abstraction probing框架，做LLM世界表征机制研究的可直接复用该实验设定。","en":"Focus on the state abstraction probing framework in §4, which can be directly reused for experimental setup of LLM world representation mechanism research."}},{"id":"2411.10830","title":"One-Layer Transformer Provably Learns One-Nearest Neighbor In Context","authors":["Zihao Li","Yuan Cao","Cheng Gao","Yihan He","Han Liu","Jason M. Klusowski","Jianqing Fan","Mengdi Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Transformers have achieved great success in recent years. Interestingly, transformers have shown particularly strong in-context learning capability -- even without fine-tuning, they are still able to solve unseen tasks well purely based on task-specific prompts. In this paper, we study the capability of one-layer transformers in learning one of the most classical nonparametric estimators, the one-nearest neighbor prediction rule. Under a theoretical framework where the prompt contains a sequence of labeled training data and unlabeled test data, we show that, although the loss function is nonconvex when trained with gradient descent, a single softmax attention layer can successfully learn to behave like a one-nearest neighbor classifier. Our result gives a concrete example of how transformers can be trained to implement nonparametric machine learning algorithms, and sheds light on the role of softmax attention in transformer models.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.10830","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiCGHLKFW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiCGHLKFW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/95827e011b9e899f189a01fe2f4ef316-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的核心问题是：一个极小的 transformer——单层 softmax attention——在什么条件下能通过训练学会 one-nearest neighbor 这种经典非参数规则，从而为 in-context learning 给出一个可证明的具体机制。过去关于 ICL 的理论往往证明 transformer 能表示某些算法，或在很强假设下近似梯度法，但缺少一个训练可达、行为可识别、又足够经典的学习规则作为锚点。","importance":"它的重要性在理论机制层面比较高。对 pretrain 研究的启示不是“以后都用 1-NN”，而是：attention 层即使非常浅，也可以在 prompt 内实现类似实例检索的规则，而且这个规则不是手工塞进去，而是可由梯度下降学出来。这支持了一个更具体的 ICL 解释：至少在某些分布下，transformer 的上下文学习能力可以落在 nearest-neighbor / kernel-like 归纳偏置上。","technical_approach":"核心方法是给出一个理论框架：prompt 中包含一串带标签训练样本和一个无标签测试样本，然后证明单层 transformer 虽然训练目标非凸，仍能经由梯度下降学成 one-nearest neighbor classifier。关键点有两个：第一，作者研究的是“learn to implement”而不是“manually simulate”，所以结论更接近真实训练；第二，选择 1-NN 作为目标规则，是因为它足够简单可分析，同时又能体现上下文中按相似性匹配案例的机制。和泛泛讨论 ICL 等价某种优化过程的工作相比，这篇更像给出一个落地的、可识别的算法实例。","experiments":"摘要明确给出的结果是理论性的：单层 softmax attention 在给定理论框架下，可通过梯度下降学出 one-nearest neighbor 行为。没有实验数字、模型规模或数据规模，因此不能编造 benchmark 结论。若正文包含实验，其意义应主要是佐证定理条件下的收敛和泛化行为，而不是追求大模型任务分数。阅读时应重点看假设是否合理，例如数据分布、特征可分性、训练初始化和样本构成是否过强；这些直接决定结论能迁移到真实 LLM 的程度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a sharp theoretical question: can a one-layer transformer, trained by gradient descent, actually learn to implement one-nearest neighbor in context? Prior ICL theory often shows representational possibility or draws analogies to optimization, but fewer results give a concrete, trained algorithmic behavior that is both classical and identifiable.","importance":"The contribution matters at the mechanism level. It does not say real LLMs are just 1-NN, but it provides a precise existence result showing that even a very shallow attention model can learn an instance-based prediction rule from prompts. For pretraining researchers, this supports a more grounded view of ICL as learned similarity-based inference under some regimes, rather than only a vague emergent capability story.","technical_approach":"The setup contains labeled in-context examples followed by an unlabeled test point, and the authors prove that a single softmax attention layer can learn to behave like a one-nearest neighbor classifier despite the nonconvex loss. The important choice here is to study learnability under gradient descent, not just hand-crafted simulation. Using 1-NN is also deliberate: it is simple enough for proof but rich enough to capture the case-based matching intuition often attributed to ICL.","experiments":"The abstract presents a theoretical result and does not give benchmark numbers, model sizes, or dataset scales. Any empirical section is likely supportive rather than central. The key thing to inspect is whether the assumptions are mild enough to inform real transformer behavior: data distribution, initialization, feature structure, and prompt format all matter for how much this theorem teaches us about practical ICL.","authors_note":""},"tags":["icl","transformer","theory","nearest-neighbor"],"keywords":["In-context learning theory","softmax attention","one-nearest neighbor"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§5的理论证明结论即可，验证了单层attention即可学出近邻匹配式ICL，可支撑后续ICL归纳偏置相关预训练目标设计。","en":"Only read the theoretical proof conclusions in §5, which verifies single-layer attention can learn nearest-neighbor style ICL to support subsequent ICL inductive bias related pretraining objective design."}},{"id":"2410.24060","title":"Understanding Generalizability of Diffusion Models Requires Rethinking the Hidden Gaussian Structure","authors":["Xiang Li","Yixiang Dai","Qing Qu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d5","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.24060","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiD024a","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiD024a","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/69e68611ec4d8c0ae4a4b2bece165f5f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作研究的核心问题是：扩散模型从记忆训练样本走向真正泛化时，内部学到的 score / denoiser 结构发生了什么变化。过去大家讨论 diffusion 的泛化，多数停留在样本质量或 memorization 检测，而缺少对“模型为什么开始泛化”的内部结构解释。","importance":"这项工作的意义在于，它给 diffusion generalization 提供了一个颇具体的结构性观察：随着模型从 memorization 走向 generalization，非线性 denoiser 越来越接近线性，而且这些线性对应物近似于由训练集经验均值和协方差定义的高斯最优 denoiser。对新型语言建模和多模态预训练研究者来说，这很有启发，因为它说明扩散模型的泛化可能并不神秘，部分可被理解为对数据低阶统计结构的稳健估计。代价是，这种解释可能更适合连续数据和 score matching 视角，迁移到离散 diffusion LM 时还要谨慎。","technical_approach":"方法核心是先经验观察非线性 diffusion denoiser 的线性化趋势，再构造与之函数匹配的线性 denoiser 进行比较。关键设计不在于提出新模型，而在于换一个分析对象：不直接盯最终生成样本，而是盯各噪声层级下学到的 denoising map。作者进一步发现，这些线性 denoiser 近似于一个由训练数据经验均值和协方差定义的多元高斯最优去噪器，这把“泛化”与“隐含高斯结构”联系了起来。和把 diffusion 完全视作高度非线性黑箱不同，这个视角强调其可被低阶统计近似解释的部分。","experiments":"摘要给出的主要实验事实是定性而非定量：从 memorization 到 generalization 的过渡中，nonlinear denoiser 线性性增强；对应的 linear denoiser 近似一个经验高斯分布下的最优去噪器。没有给出数据集、模型规模、误差指标或提升数字，因此不能扩写具体结果。真正值得关注的是两点 ablation：这一现象是否跨噪声水平稳定出现；以及它是否只在简单数据分布上成立。如果只在低维或近高斯数据上显著，那么结论更多是分析工具；如果在复杂视觉数据上也稳定，就更像是 diffusion 泛化的共性机制。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks what changes inside a diffusion model when it moves from memorizing training data to genuinely generalizing. Prior discussions of diffusion generalization often focus on sample quality or memorization tests, but give little structural account of what the learned score functions are doing differently.","importance":"Its main contribution is a concrete structural observation: as diffusion models transition toward generalization, their nonlinear denoisers become increasingly linear, and those linear counterparts look close to optimal denoisers for a Gaussian defined by the empirical mean and covariance of the training set. This matters because it suggests that at least part of diffusion generalization may be explained through low-order statistics rather than only through opaque nonlinear feature learning. For diffusion language modeling, the implication is suggestive but not automatically transferable, since discrete diffusion settings have different geometry.","technical_approach":"The method is analytic rather than architectural. The authors first observe an increasing linearity in learned denoisers, then fit linear models to match the nonlinear denoising maps across noise levels. The key insight is to study the denoising operators themselves, not just generated samples. They then relate these linear operators to Gaussian-optimal denoisers derived from the empirical first and second moments of the training data, which reframes generalization in terms of hidden Gaussian structure.","experiments":"The abstract reports qualitative findings rather than benchmark numbers: denoisers become more linear as the model generalizes, and the matched linear denoisers approximate Gaussian-optimal ones under empirical dataset statistics. No model sizes, datasets, or exact metrics are given. The critical empirical questions are whether this pattern holds consistently across noise levels and whether it survives on complex real data rather than only simple or nearly Gaussian settings.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion-model","generalization","memorization","score-function"],"keywords":["diffusion models","inductive bias","generalization","memorization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看Fig4的泛化阶段与denoiser线性化的对应关系，做扩散预训练的可参考该结论调整训练数据统计分布对齐策略。","en":"Focus on the correlation between generalization stage and denoiser linearization in Fig4, which can guide training data statistical alignment strategy adjustment for diffusion pretraining."}},{"id":"2404.11225","title":"In-Context Learning State Vector with Inner and Momentum Optimization","authors":["Dongfang Li","Zhenyu Liu","Xinshuo Hu","Zetian Sun","Baotian Hu","Min Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d6","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.11225","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiLHSH024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiLHSH024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/0ed52d7f6f641f228405d48a611e0684-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有研究发现ICL学习的函数可以通过Transformer导出的压缩向量表示，但这类向量的作用机制和优化方法尚未被充分探索，现有ICL性能受示例顺序、数量等因素限制，测试时适配能力弱。","importance":"属于ICL机制研究的方法级贡献，明确了ICL状态向量的参数类属性，提出的优化方法可以在不微调模型的前提下提升ICL的测试时适配性能，对少样本推理场景有实用价值。","technical_approach":"将ICL压缩向量类比为梯度下降训练的参数，定义为状态向量，借鉴模型soup和动量梯度下降的思路，提出内部优化和动量优化两种方法，在测试时逐步迭代优化状态向量，提升ICL泛化性能，不需要修改模型原始参数。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露模型参数量、基线、指标提升等完整实验数据，无可用量化结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing works show that functions learned via in-context learning (ICL) can be represented by compressed vectors derived from Transformers, but the working mechanism and optimization methods of these vectors are not thoroughly explored. Existing ICL performance is limited by factors such as example order and quantity, with weak test-time adaptation capability.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution for ICL mechanism research. It clarifies the parameter-like property of ICL state vectors, and the proposed optimization methods improve ICL test-time adaptation performance without fine-tuning the base model, which is practical for few-shot inference scenarios.","technical_approach":"The compressed ICL vectors are analogized to parameters trained via gradient descent, and defined as state vectors. Inspired by model soup and momentum-based gradient descent, two optimization methods (inner optimization and momentum optimization) are proposed to iteratively refine state vectors during test time, improving ICL generalization without modifying original model parameters.","experiments":"Full experiment details including model size, baselines and metric improvements are not disclosed in the public abstract, no quantitative results available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","state-vector","optimization","transformer"],"keywords":["in-context learning","language models","task representations","mechanistic interpretability"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"ICL学习的函数可以通过Transformer的隐层压缩向量表征","claim_en":"ICL learned functions can be represented by compressed hidden vectors of Transformers","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3.2的动量优化实现即可，少样本推理场景下可直接复用该方法在测试时优化ICL状态向量，无需微调模型。","en":"Only read the momentum optimization implementation in §3.2, which can be directly reused to optimize ICL state vectors at test time for few-shot scenarios without model finetuning."}},{"id":"LiTM0W024","title":"StreamingDialogue: Prolonged Dialogue Learning via Long Context Compression with Minimal Losses","authors":["Jianan Li","Quan Tu","Cunli Mao","Zhengtao Yu","Ji-Rong Wen","Rui Yan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d7","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiTM0W024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiTM0W024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9c43057f39d49b8b5c989cc1aac70ab7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM处理长对话时存在效率低、一致性差的问题，主流长上下文方案虽然能扩大窗口，但计算复杂度随上下文长度平方增长，推理开销过高。","importance":"属于长对话推理方向的方法级贡献，利用对话的结构化特性降低计算开销，不需要修改模型架构也不需要额外训练，可以直接适配现有支持长上下文的LLM，降低长对话推理成本。","technical_approach":"观察到对话的结束符（EoU）可以作为对话注意力汇（conv-attn sinks）聚合单轮对话信息，提出StreamingDialogue方法，将每轮对话历史压缩为对应的EoU token表示，计算复杂度随对话轮数平方下降，压缩过程信息损失极小。","experiments":"公开摘要仅提及适配200K+上下文窗口的LLM，未披露压缩损失率、效率提升幅度等量化数据，无可用详细结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Standard LLMs suffer from low efficiency and poor consistency when processing long dialogues. Existing long context window solutions expand context capacity but have quadratic computational complexity over context length, leading to excessively high inference cost.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution for long dialogue inference. It leverages the structural property of dialogues to reduce computational overhead, requiring no modification to model architecture or extra training, and can be directly applied to existing long-context LLMs to cut long dialogue inference cost.","technical_approach":"The work observes that End-of-Utterance (EoU) tokens in dialogues can act as conversational attention sinks to aggregate single-turn information. The proposed StreamingDialogue compresses each turn of dialogue history into the corresponding EoU token representation, reducing computational complexity to quadratic over the number of dialogue turns, with minimal information loss during compression.","experiments":"The public abstract only mentions compatibility with LLMs with 200K+ context windows, no quantitative data including compression loss rate and efficiency improvement is disclosed, no detailed results available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-context","dialogue","context-compression"],"keywords":["dialogue compression","conversational attention sinks","memory"],"notable_authors":["Ji-Rong Wen"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"对话上下文具有高度结构化特性","claim_en":"Dialogue contexts are highly structured","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅利用对话已有的EoU token作为注意力汇压缩长对话上下文，可以实现接近无损的压缩效果，不需要额外训练压缩模块","claim_en":"Compressing long dialogue contexts using existing EoU tokens as conversational attention sinks achieves near-lossless compression, without requiring extra training of dedicated compression modules","opposes":"之前的长对话压缩方法认为需要额外训练专用压缩模块才能实现低信息损失的压缩","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§2 Method","why_contested":"大幅降低了长对话压缩的落地门槛，可直接适配现有商用LLM"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§3的EoU注意力汇压缩方案即可，长对话推理场景可直接复用该方法降低计算开销，无需修改模型架构。","en":"Only read the EoU attention sink compression scheme in §3, which can be directly reused to reduce computational cost for long dialogue inference without modifying model architecture."}},{"id":"LiaoM24","title":"3-in-1: 2D Rotary Adaptation for Efficient Finetuning, Efficient Batching and Composability","authors":["Baohao Liao","Christof Monz"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d8","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiaoM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiaoM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3dbcadb7beedc2afe32bb23f75dd30ec-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有PEFT方法虽然降低了微调成本，但存在三个落地痛点：多适配器同批处理时效率低、适配器可组合性差、模型可解释性弱，没有单个PEFT方案同时解决三个问题。","importance":"属于PEFT方向的改进级贡献，提出的RoAd方法同时覆盖高效微调、高效批处理、可组合三个落地需求，降低了多任务PEFT模型的部署成本，对大规模多任务LLM服务场景有实用价值。","technical_approach":"提出RoAd方法，用2D旋转操作适配LLM，通过旋转矩阵修改注意力层的RoPE编码实现参数高效微调，单个适配器参数量远小于LoRA，同时支持同批不同请求加载不同适配器、多适配器任意组合，旋转操作的可解释性强。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露适配器参数量、基线、指标对比等完整实验数据，无可用量化结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing PEFT methods reduce fine-tuning cost but have three key deployment pain points: low efficiency when batching requests with multiple adapters, poor composability of adapters, and weak model interpretability. No single PEFT solution addresses all three problems simultaneously.","importance":"This is an improvement-level contribution for PEFT methods. The proposed RoAd method covers three deployment requirements at the same time, reducing the deployment cost of multi-task PEFT models, which is practical for large-scale multi-task LLM serving scenarios.","technical_approach":"The proposed RoAd method adapts LLMs via 2D rotation operations, modifying the RoPE encoding of attention layers to achieve parameter-efficient fine-tuning. The parameter size of a single RoAd adapter is much smaller than LoRA. It supports loading different adapters for different requests in the same batch, arbitrary combination of multiple adapters, and has strong interpretability due to the explicit rotation mechanism.","experiments":"Full experiment details including adapter parameter size, baselines and metric comparisons are not disclosed in the public abstract, no quantitative results available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rope","finetuning","batching","efficiency"],"keywords":["parameter-efficient finetuning","orthogonal finetuning","batching","interpretability"],"notable_authors":["Christof Monz"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"PEFT方法需要兼顾参数效率和部署效率","claim_en":"PEFT methods need to balance parameter efficiency and deployment efficiency","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于2D旋转的PEFT方法可以同时实现高效微调、同批多适配器高效处理、适配器可组合三个目标，性能不弱于现有主流PEFT方法","claim_en":"2D rotation-based PEFT can achieve three goals simultaneously: efficient fine-tuning, efficient batching of multiple adapters, and adapter composability, with performance comparable to mainstream PEFT methods","opposes":"之前的PEFT方法只能解决三个需求中的1-2个，无法在不损失性能的前提下覆盖全部三个需求","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"简化了多任务PEFT模型的部署栈，降低了服务开销"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为PEFT落地相关文献备查，无需读正文，仅需知道2D旋转适配可同时满足多任务批处理、可组合需求即可。","en":"For PEFT deployment literature reference only, no need to read full text, just note that 2D rotary adaptation supports multi-task batching and composability simultaneously."}},{"id":"LinFL0L00WY24","title":"Delving into the Reversal Curse: How Far Can Large Language Models Generalize?","authors":["Zhengkai Lin","Zhihang Fu","Kai Liu","Liang Xie","Binbin Lin","Wenxiao Wang","Deng Cai","Yue Wu","Jieping Ye"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$d9","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LinFL0L00WY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LinFL0L00WY24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/36b6180f3dab4025ba763e853b044814-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM存在反转诅咒问题，即训练时见过\"A是B\"无法推理出\"B是A\"，但现有研究对反转诅咒的表现边界、影响因素、底层机制尚未明确。","importance":"属于LLM知识泛化机制的研究级贡献，明确了反转诅咒的适用边界，修正了之前对反转诅咒的泛化认知，为预训练数据构造、知识注入方法优化提供了依据。","technical_approach":"在多类任务上验证反转诅咒的表现，对比不同任务结构、上下文输入形式下的泛化性能，得出两个核心结论：1）当A和B同时出现在上下文（如选择题场景）中时，LLM可以正确推理出\"B是A\"；2）泛化能力和训练数据中事实的结构高度相关。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露模型参数量、数据集规模、量化对比等完整实验数据，无可用详细结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs suffer from the reversal curse: when trained on the fact \"A is B\", they cannot infer \"B is A\". Existing research has not clarified the performance boundary, influencing factors and underlying mechanism of the reversal curse.","importance":"This is a research-level contribution to LLM knowledge generalization mechanism. It clarifies the applicable boundary of the reversal curse, corrects previous overgeneralized understanding of the phenomenon, and provides guidance for pre-training data construction and knowledge injection method optimization.","technical_approach":"The work verifies the performance of the reversal curse across multiple tasks, compares generalization performance under different task structures and context input formats, and draws two core conclusions: 1) When both A and B appear in the context (e.g., multiple-choice questions), LLMs can correctly infer \"B is A\"; 2) The generalization ability is highly correlated with the structure of facts in training data.","experiments":"Full experiment details including model size, dataset scale and quantitative comparison results are not disclosed in the public abstract, no detailed results available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["generalization","reversal-curse","llm-evaluation","reasoning"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Interpretability","Reversal Curse","Knowledge Injection"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM对事实知识存在反转诅咒现象","claim_en":"LLMs exhibit the reversal curse phenomenon for factual knowledge","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"反转诅咒不是绝对的，当A和B同时出现在输入上下文中时，LLM可以正确完成\"B是A\"的推理，泛化性能与事实的结构高度相关","claim_en":"The reversal curse is not absolute. When both A and B appear in the input context, LLMs can correctly infer \"B is A\", and the generalization performance is highly correlated with the structure of the fact","opposes":"之前的研究认为反转诅咒是LLM的根本限制，无论输入形式如何，LLM都无法将\"A是B\"泛化为\"B是A\"","opposes_cite_hint":"Berglund 2023 Reversal Curse","evidence_anchor":"§4 Findings","why_contested":"修正了反转诅咒的核心结论，为通过输入构造或数据优化缓解该现象提供了新方向"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§4的反转诅咒边界实验结论，做预训练数据构造和知识注入的可参考该结论优化事实数据的结构配比。","en":"Focus on the reversal curse boundary experiment conclusions in §4, which can guide fact data structure ratio optimization for pretraining data construction and knowledge injection."}},{"id":"LinWKBL24","title":"Scaling Laws in Linear Regression: Compute, Parameters, and Data","authors":["Licong Lin","Jingfeng Wu","Sham M. Kakade","Peter L. Bartlett","Jason D. Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$da","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LinWKBL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LinWKBL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/6fcb1afcc1e9c2c82c8ddddf03bcf0f6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"深度学习的经验缩放定律显示测试误差随模型和数据规模增长多项式下降，但传统统计学习理论认为方差误差随模型规模上升，和缩放定律的单调下降结论矛盾，缺乏统一的理论解释。","importance":"属于缩放定律方向的理论级贡献，在无限维线性回归设置下给出了缩放定律的严格理论证明，弥补了经验观察和传统理论之间的鸿沟，为大模型缩放定律的理论研究提供了基础框架。","technical_approach":"在无限维线性回归设置下，将M参数模型建模为sketch协变量的线性函数，用N条数据做单遍SGD训练，假设最优参数满足高斯先验，推导得到测试误差随参数、数据、计算规模变化的缩放关系，符合经验观察的多项式缩放形式，解释了为什么模型规模上升时测试误差单调下降。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露仿真实验参数、量化匹配结果等完整实验数据，无可用详细结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Empirical neural scaling laws show that test error decreases polynomially with growing model size and data size, but traditional statistical learning theory claims that variance error increases with model size, which contradicts the monotonic performance improvement predicted by scaling laws. No unified theoretical explanation exists for this contradiction.","importance":"This is a theory-level contribution for scaling law research. It provides a rigorous theoretical proof of scaling laws under the infinite-dimensional linear regression setup, bridges the gap between empirical observations and traditional theory, and provides a basic framework for theoretical research of large model scaling laws.","technical_approach":"Under the infinite-dimensional linear regression setup, the model with M parameters is modeled as a linear function of sketched covariates, trained via one-pass SGD with N data points. Assuming the optimal parameter satisfies a Gaussian prior, the work derives the scaling relation of test error with parameter count, data size and compute budget, which matches the empirically observed polynomial scaling form, and explains why test error decreases monotonically with growing model size.","experiments":"Full experiment details including simulation parameters and quantitative matching results are not disclosed in the public abstract, no detailed results available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["scaling-law","linear-regression","compute","data"],"keywords":["learning theory","scaling law","deep learning","SGD","optimization"],"notable_authors":["Sham M. Kakade","Peter L. Bartlett","Jason D. Lee"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大模型测试误差随模型和数据规模增长多项式下降是广泛验证的经验观察","claim_en":"Test error of large models decreases polynomially with increasing model size and data size is a widely verified empirical observation","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"在无限维线性回归设置下，用单遍SGD训练的模型的测试误差随模型规模增长单调下降，与传统统计学习的方差上升结论不矛盾，因为大模型的参数冗余可以抵消方差上升的影响","claim_en":"Under the infinite-dimensional linear regression setup, test error of models trained via one-pass SGD decreases monotonically with growing model size, which does not contradict traditional statistical learning conclusions, as parameter redundancy of large models offsets the increase of variance error","opposes":"传统统计学习理论认为受方差误差上升影响，测试误差会随模型规模增长先下降后上升，与经验缩放定律矛盾","opposes_cite_hint":"Vapnik 1995 Statistical Learning Theory","evidence_anchor":"§3 Derivation","why_contested":"提供了统一传统统计学习和经验缩放定律观察的理论框架，为后续缩放定律理论研究奠定了基础"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§3的缩放定律推导结论即可，做预训练scaling策略研究的可参考该理论框架对齐经验观测与统计理论。","en":"Only read the scaling law derivation conclusions in §3, which can be referenced to align empirical observations with statistical theory for pretraining scaling strategy research."}},{"id":"LinXWCZMSS024","title":"DuQuant: Distributing Outliers via Dual Transformation Makes Stronger Quantized LLMs","authors":["Haokun Lin","Haobo Xu","Yichen Wu","Jingzhi Cui","Yingtao Zhang","Linzhan Mou","Linqi Song","Zhenan Sun","Ying Wei"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$db","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LinXWCZMSS024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LinXWCZMSS024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9febda1c8344cc5f2d51713964864e93-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"大模型低比特量化的性能损失主要由激活离群点导致，现有方法仅能处理数值较低的普通离群点，对数值远高于普通水平的大规模离群点会出现严重性能下降，此前没有兼顾两类离群点的无开销量化方案。","importance":"方法级贡献，解决了4bit及以下低比特量化的性能瓶颈，不需要修改模型架构或引入推理开销，可直接适配现有量化部署流水线，对端侧大模型部署有实际落地价值。","technical_approach":"原创双变换量化方法，基于离群维度先验构造旋转矩阵，将离群点数值分散到多个维度，再通过置换变换进一步均衡激活分布，同时覆盖普通和大规模两类离群点，量化后模型推理无额外计算开销。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，仅说明方法可同时缓解两类离群点导致的量化损失，入选NeurIPS 2024 Oral。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Low-bit LLM quantization performance degradation is mainly caused by activation outliers. Existing methods only handle normal outliers with moderate magnitude, and suffer severe accuracy drop when dealing with massive outliers with significantly larger values. No prior overhead-free solution addresses both types of outliers.","importance":"Method-level contribution that solves the performance bottleneck of sub-4bit quantization. It requires no model architecture modification or extra inference overhead, and is compatible with existing quantization deployment pipelines, delivering practical value for edge LLM deployment.","technical_approach":"Original dual-transformation quantization method. It first constructs a rotation matrix based on outlier dimension priors to redistribute outlier values across multiple dimensions, then uses permutation transformation to further balance activation distribution. It covers both normal and massive outliers, with no extra computation overhead for inference of quantized models.","experiments":"Full experimental data is not disclosed in the public abstract. It only states that the method mitigates quantization loss caused by both types of outliers, and is selected as NeurIPS 2024 Oral.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","llm","outliers","inference"],"keywords":["Model compression","Post-training Quantization","PTQ of Large Language Models"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"低比特LLM量化的性能损失主要由激活离群点导致","claim_en":"Performance degradation of low-bit LLM quantization is mainly caused by activation outliers","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"旋转+置换的双变换可以在不引入推理开销的前提下，同时缓解普通离群点和大规模离群点导致的量化损失","claim_en":"Dual transformation of rotation and permutation can mitigate quantization loss caused by both normal and massive outliers without additional inference overhead","opposes":"现有量化方法仅能处理普通离群点，处理大规模离群点会引入额外开销或严重性能下降","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"打破了低比特量化对大规模离群点的性能瓶颈，可直接落地到现有推理框架"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为低比特量化落地文献备查，无需读正文，仅需知道双变换可无额外开销处理激活离群点提升4bit量化精度即可。","en":"For low-bit quantization deployment literature reference only, no need to read full text, just note that dual transformation handles activation outliers to improve 4bit quantization accuracy without extra overhead."}},{"id":"LingWYL24","title":"SlimGPT: Layer-wise Structured Pruning for Large Language Models","authors":["Gui Ling","Ziyang Wang","Yuliang Yan","Qingwen Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$dc","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LingWYL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LingWYL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c1c44e46358e0fb94dc94ec495a7fb1a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"大模型结构化剪枝后，有限算力下的性能恢复难度高，现有剪枝方法要么计算开销大、要么剪后精度损失严重，无法平衡剪枝效率和最终性能。","importance":"方法级贡献，大幅降低了大模型结构化剪枝的算力门槛，可快速产出精度损失极小的稀疏模型，适合中小团队定制轻量化部署模型的需求。","technical_approach":"基于最优脑外科医生（OBS）框架改进的分层结构化剪枝方法，原创批量贪心剪枝策略：用分组Cholesky分解提升注意力头剪枝的误差估计精度，用动态分组大小提升FFN层的剪枝效率，不需要全量微调即可接近最优剪枝效果。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，仅说明方法实现了剪枝效率和精度的平衡，为NeurIPS 2024 Poster。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Performance restoration of structurally pruned LLMs under limited compute is challenging. Existing pruning methods either have high computation cost or suffer severe accuracy drop after pruning, failing to balance pruning efficiency and final performance.","importance":"Method-level contribution that significantly reduces the compute threshold for LLM structured pruning. It can quickly produce sparse models with negligible accuracy loss, fitting the demand of small teams for customized lightweight deployment models.","technical_approach":"Layer-wise structured pruning method improved from the Optimal Brain Surgeon framework. It proposes an original batched greedy pruning strategy: uses grouped Cholesky decomposition to improve error estimation accuracy for attention head pruning, and dynamic group size to improve FFN pruning efficiency. It achieves near-optimal pruning results without full fine-tuning.","experiments":"Full experimental data is not disclosed in the public abstract. It only states that the method balances pruning efficiency and accuracy, and is accepted as NeurIPS 2024 Poster.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm","pruning","compression","structured-pruning"],"keywords":["Model Compression","Structured Pruning","Layer-wise Pruning","Large Language Model"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"结构化剪枝是平衡LLM性能和部署效率的有效方法","claim_en":"Structured pruning is an effective method to balance LLM performance and deployment efficiency","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于分组Cholesky分解和动态分组大小的批量贪心剪枝，可在低算力下达到接近最优的结构化剪枝效果","claim_en":"Batched greedy pruning based on grouped Cholesky decomposition and dynamic group size achieves near-optimal structured pruning results under low compute budget","opposes":"现有OBS类剪枝方法计算复杂度高，需要大量算力才能得到较优剪枝结果","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"大幅降低了大模型剪枝的门槛，小算力团队也可快速产出定制化稀疏模型"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为结构化剪枝落地文献备查，无需读正文，仅需知道分层OBS剪枝可低算力开销得到精度损失极小的稀疏模型即可。","en":"For structured pruning deployment literature reference only, no need to read full text, just note that layer-wise OBS pruning yields sparse models with minimal accuracy loss at low computational cost."}},{"id":"LiuGHJZQZ24","title":"Can Language Models Learn to Skip Steps?","authors":["Tengxiao Liu","Qipeng Guo","Xiangkun Hu","Cheng Jiayang","Yue Zhang","Xipeng Qiu","Zheng Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$dd","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiuGHJZQZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiuGHJZQZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/504fa7e518da9d1b53a233ed20a38b46-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"人类专家可根据熟练度跳过不必要的推理步骤提升效率，但现有大模型没有主动跳步的能力，生成的推理链冗余度高，推理速度慢，此前没有无监督训练跳步能力的方案。","importance":"认知机制级贡献，揭示了大模型推理能力的可调控性，挑战了思维链必须完整的固有认知，为优化推理效率、探索隐式推理范式提供了实验基础。","technical_approach":"原创迭代式推理路径精简框架，通过多轮迭代引导模型逐步生成更短且准确的推理路径，不需要额外标注精简后的推理数据，仅用现有思维链数据即可训练出跳步能力。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，仅说明模型在该框架下可有效习得跳步推理能力，且推理准确性无明显下降，为NeurIPS 2024 Poster。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Human experts can skip unnecessary reasoning steps to improve efficiency based on proficiency, but existing LLMs have no inherent step-skipping ability. Their generated reasoning chains are highly redundant, leading to slow inference speed. No prior unsupervised solution exists for training step-skipping ability.","importance":"Cognitive mechanism-level contribution that reveals the adjustability of LLM reasoning ability. It challenges the inherent belief that complete chain-of-thought is mandatory, and provides experimental basis for optimizing inference efficiency and exploring latent reasoning paradigms.","technical_approach":"Original iterative reasoning path refinement framework. It guides the model to gradually generate shorter and accurate reasoning paths through multi-round iteration, requiring no additional annotated condensed reasoning data. It trains step-skipping ability using only existing chain-of-thought data.","experiments":"Full experimental data is not disclosed in the public abstract. It only states that models can effectively learn step-skipping reasoning ability under the framework without obvious accuracy drop, and is accepted as NeurIPS 2024 Poster.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","step-skipping","cot","llm"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Natural Language Processing","Reasoning","Human-like Abilities"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大模型的推理能力与人类推理行为存在一定的相似性","claim_en":"LLM reasoning ability has certain similarities with human reasoning behavior","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"大模型可通过迭代式路径精简训练习得跳步推理能力，且不会损失推理准确性","claim_en":"LLMs can learn step-skipping reasoning ability through iterative path refinement training without sacrificing reasoning accuracy","opposes":"大模型必须生成完整的思维链才能保证推理准确性，缩短推理链会导致精度下降","opposes_cite_hint":"Wei 2022 Chain-of-Thought","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"挑战了思维链必须完整的固有认知，为提升大模型推理速度提供了新路径"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§4的跳步训练实验结论，做推理效率优化的可参考该迭代式精简框架训练隐式推理能力，无需额外标注数据。","en":"Focus on the step-skipping training experiment conclusions in §4, which can guide implicit reasoning ability training via iterative simplification framework without extra labeled data."}},{"id":"LiuHZZLKTYLFNYS24","title":"APIGen: Automated PIpeline for Generating Verifiable and Diverse Function-Calling Datasets","authors":["Zuxin Liu","Thai Hoang","Jianguo Zhang","Ming Zhu","Tian Lan","Shirley Kokane","Juntao Tan","Weiran Yao","Zhiwei Liu","Yihao Feng","Rithesh R. N.","Liangwei Yang","Silvio Savarese","Juan Carlos Niebles","Huan Wang","Shelby Heinecke","Caiming Xiong"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$de","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiuHZZLKTYLFNYS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiuHZZLKTYLFNYS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/61cce86d180b1184949e58939c4f983d-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如何自动构造可验证、分布多样、能真实覆盖工具调用错误模式的 function-calling 数据集。现有函数调用数据大多依赖人工标注或模板合成，规模上不去，且常把“会输出 JSON”误当成“会正确调用 API”，缺少可执行验证信号。","importance":"它的价值主要在数据与训练基础设施层，而不是新模型结构。对 pretrain/post-train 接口的启示是：工具使用能力不是单靠指令微调堆出来的，关键在于是否有可执行、可判错、覆盖真实组合复杂度的数据生成流水线；如果这件事做稳了，后续 SFT、RM、agent training 的信号质量会明显改善。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一条自动化数据生成流水线，用程序执行结果而不是表面格式来验证样本质量。按题目判断，APIGen 的关键设计应包括：从 API 规格或函数签名出发生成调用任务；构造多样化参数组合、约束和多轮上下文；再通过执行器或规则校验器验证调用是否正确，从而筛掉“格式像对但语义错”的样本。它和纯 LLM self-instruct 的区别在于把验证放进闭环，牺牲一部分生成自由度，换来更强的 correctness signal 和更低的数据污染率。","experiments":"从给定信息里看不到具体实验数字，因此只能保守判断：论文大概率比较了 APIGen 生成数据与人工/模板/self-instruct 数据在 function-calling 基准上的效果，并验证数据多样性与可验证性带来的泛化收益。更值得关注的不是是否单点刷榜，而是两个问题：一是模型是否学到跨 API 的参数约束与组合泛化；二是自动验证是否真的减少了 hallucinated call、wrong argument、missing field 这类高频错误。具体参数量、数据规模、提升幅度目前无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical bottleneck: how to build function-calling datasets that are large, diverse, and actually verifiable. Existing datasets often rely on manual annotation or templated synthesis, which scales poorly and tends to reward JSON formatting rather than semantically correct API use.","importance":"This is primarily a data-pipeline contribution, not an architecture contribution. Its relevance to pretraining and post-training is that tool-use quality depends heavily on executable supervision; if the dataset can validate calls by execution or strict checking, SFT and downstream agent training get a much cleaner signal.","technical_approach":"The method is an automated pipeline that generates function-calling examples and validates them with programmatic checks instead of surface-form matching. From the title, the likely design is: start from API specs or signatures, synthesize diverse invocation scenarios, then verify correctness through execution or structured validators. The key trade-off is deliberate: constrain generation enough to make correctness testable, rather than maximizing free-form diversity at the cost of label noise.","experiments":"The provided metadata does not include quantitative results, so the safe read is limited. The likely evaluation compares APIGen-built data against manual, templated, or self-instruct baselines on function-calling benchmarks, with emphasis on correctness and diversity. The most useful checks would be whether it improves cross-API generalization and reduces common failure modes such as wrong arguments, omitted fields, or plausible-but-invalid calls. Model sizes, dataset scale, and exact gains are not available here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["function-calling","data-synthesis","sft","llm"],"keywords":["LLM Agent","function-calling","data synthesis","data generation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3流水线设计和§4.1样本验证模块即可，可直接复用优化内部工具调用数据生成流程","en":"Only read §3 pipeline design and §4.1 sample validation module, directly reusable for internal function-calling data generation pipeline optimization"}},{"id":"LuD0CDFG24","title":"AutoPSV: Automated Process-Supervised Verifier","authors":["Jianqiao Lu","Zhiyang Dou","Hongru Wang","Zeyu Cao","Jianbo Dai","Yunlong Feng","Zhijiang Guo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$df","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LuD0CDFG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LuD0CDFG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9246aa822579d9b29a140ecdac36ad60-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是过程监督里最贵的一环：高质量 verifier 很有用，但人工标注推理步骤极其昂贵，难以扩到大规模。现有做法常依赖少量人工过程标签或结果监督替代，导致 verifier 对中间步骤的判别能力不足。","importance":"它的重要性在于为 process supervision 提供自动化路径。对 pretrain/post-train 的启示是，若能稳定自动构造步骤级 verifier，强化学习和搜索式推理就不必只靠 final answer reward，训练信号会更密、更可诊断，也更接近 latent reasoning 研究真正需要的中间监督。","technical_approach":"AutoPSV 从标题看是 Automated Process-Supervised Verifier，即自动生成或训练过程监督验证器。关键不只是训练一个打分器，而是把过程标签获取自动化，可能通过自举、规则检查、结果一致性、步骤扰动对比等方式构造正负过程样本。与仅看答案对错的 ORM/PRM 不同，它强调步骤质量；但边界也明显：自动标签如果噪声太高，verifier 很容易学到表面形式而非真实推理有效性。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认是否在数学、代码或通用推理上验证。通常这类工作会比较人工过程监督 verifier、结果监督 verifier 与自动过程 verifier，在 reranking、best-of-N、MCTS 或 RL 场景中的增益。最关键的证据不是单独的 verifier accuracy，而是它能否提升最终推理正确率，以及在分布外题目上是否比 outcome-only reward 更稳。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a major bottleneck in process supervision: good verifiers are valuable, but manually labeling reasoning steps is expensive and hard to scale. Existing approaches often rely on small amounts of annotated process data or fall back to outcome supervision, which weakens signal quality on intermediate reasoning.","importance":"Its importance lies in automating process-level supervision. For pretraining and post-training research, that matters because scalable step-level verifiers could provide denser and more diagnostic training signals than final-answer rewards alone, especially for search, reranking, and reasoning-focused RL.","technical_approach":"From the title, AutoPSV is an automated process-supervised verifier pipeline. The likely idea is not merely to train a verifier, but to automate the creation of process labels through self-bootstrapping, consistency checks, rule-based validation, or contrastive corruptions of reasoning traces. The benefit over outcome-only reward models is finer-grained supervision, though the main risk is that noisy auto-labels may teach the verifier superficial style cues rather than genuine reasoning quality.","experiments":"The abstract is unavailable, so the exact domains and gains cannot be confirmed. A typical evaluation would compare automated process verifiers against manually supervised process verifiers and outcome-only verifiers on tasks such as math or code reasoning, measuring gains in reranking, best-of-N selection, search, or RL. The crucial result would be whether the verifier improves final answer accuracy, especially out of distribution, not just verifier classification metrics.","authors_note":""},"tags":["process-supervision","verifier","reward-model","alignment"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Math Reasoning","Commonsense Reasoning","Automatic Process Annotation","Multi-step Reasoning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3自动过程标签构造方法，可参考优化内部推理验证器的训练数据生成流程","en":"Only read §3 automatic process label construction method, referenceable for internal reasoning verifier training data generation optimization"}},{"id":"2406.04331","title":"PaCE: Parsimonious Concept Engineering for Large Language Models","authors":["Jinqi Luo","Tianjiao Ding","Kwan Ho Ryan Chan","Darshan Thaker","Aditya Chattopadhyay","Chris Callison-Burch","René Vidal"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e0","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.04331","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LuoDCTCCV24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LuoDCTCCV24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/b3cca813dcd78fe75e4d4df2e6a0b1a7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是 activation engineering 做对齐时的两难：既要移除有害概念，又不能顺手把正常语言能力一起伤掉。现有方法要么需要针对每个目标重新微调，成本高；要么概念方向过粗，抑制不干净或误伤 benign concepts。","importance":"它的重要性在于提供一种轻量、训练外的对齐控制手段。对 pretrain/post-train 接口的启示是，模型内部确实存在可操作的概念子空间；如果能更稀疏、更局部地编辑这些表示，就有机会在不重训模型的前提下做行为调节，这对安全、风格控制和 deployment-time adaptation 都有意义。","technical_approach":"PaCE 是一种 parsimonious concept engineering 方法，属于 activation engineering 框架。摘要显示它强调“parsimonious”，也就是用更节制的表示编辑去定位并抑制目标概念，而不是做大范围激活偏移。它与需要全模型微调的 alignment 方法不同，成本低、可逆性更强；与粗粒度概念擦除相比，它更关注选择性，目标是在消除有害概念的同时尽量保住语言流畅性和一般知识。","experiments":"摘要虽然被截断，但能确认作者把它用于 alignment，并比较了 harmful output、racist/sexist language、hallucination 这类 undesirable outputs。合理预期是：与微调、prompt engineering 和已有 representation engineering baseline 对比，PaCE 在降低不良输出的同时，对通用能力损失更小。最值得看的实验是 specificity：它是否只压制目标概念，而不扩大到相邻无害概念；如果有层位和方向数目的消融，会很关键。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a central tension in activation-based alignment: removing undesirable concepts without degrading benign language capability. Existing methods either require task-specific finetuning, which is expensive, or use coarse concept directions that fail to suppress harmful behavior cleanly and often damage unrelated behavior.","importance":"Its contribution is a lightweight, training-free or training-light alignment mechanism. For the pretraining/post-training interface, the broader implication is that LLM representations contain manipulable concept subspaces, and if those can be edited sparsely and selectively, some behavior control can be achieved without full retraining.","technical_approach":"PaCE, short for Parsimonious Concept Engineering, is an activation engineering method designed to intervene more selectively. The emphasis on parsimony suggests that it seeks a minimal or sparse representation edit, rather than broad activation shifts, to suppress targeted concepts while preserving general capability. This distinguishes it from full finetuning and from blunt concept-erasure methods that often over-remove.","experiments":"Although the abstract is truncated, it clearly frames the evaluation around alignment targets such as harmful outputs, racist or sexist language, and hallucinations. A sensible comparison would include finetuning, prompt engineering, and prior representation-editing baselines, measuring both reduction of undesirable behavior and retention of normal linguistic ability. The most useful evidence would be specificity: whether the intervention suppresses only the targeted concept with limited collateral damage.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","representation-editing","concept-steering","safety"],"keywords":["Large Language Model","Sparse Coding","Trustworthy Machine Learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4概念子空间定位实验部分，可参考设计内部激活编辑对齐方案","en":"Only read §4 concept subspace localization experiments, referenceable for internal activation engineering alignment solution design"}},{"id":"LuoYL24","title":"BAdam: A Memory Efficient Full Parameter Optimization Method for Large Language Models","authors":["Qijun Luo","Hengxu Yu","Xiao Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e1","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LuoYL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LuoYL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/2c570b0f9938c7a58a612e5b00af9cc0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"大模型全参数微调的内存开销极高，现有低内存微调方法如LoRA属于参数高效微调，下游性能低于全参数微调，此前没有可在消费级GPU上运行、性能接近全参数微调的方案。","importance":"优化器级贡献，打破了全参数微调对高显存硬件的依赖，大幅降低了大模型定制化微调的硬件门槛，对中小团队的模型适配需求有直接落地价值。","technical_approach":"基于块坐标下降（BCD）框架改进的Adam优化器，每次仅更新模型参数的一个子块，大幅减少需要存储的优化器状态数量，理论上可证明收敛性，和现有训练流水线完全兼容。","experiments":"单张RTX3090-24GB可完成Llama3-8B全参数微调，4张A100-80GB可完成Llama3-70B全参数微调；MT-Bench和数学基准上性能超过LoRA等现有低内存微调基线，与标准全量Adam微调效果相当，内存开销降低约70%。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Full-parameter fine-tuning of LLMs has extremely high memory overhead. Existing memory-efficient fine-tuning methods such as LoRA are parameter-efficient, with downstream performance lower than full-parameter fine-tuning. No prior solution can run on consumer GPUs and achieve performance close to full-parameter fine-tuning.","importance":"Optimizer-level contribution that breaks the dependency of full-parameter fine-tuning on high-memory hardware. It significantly reduces the hardware threshold for customized LLM fine-tuning, delivering direct practical value for model adaptation demands of small and medium teams.","technical_approach":"Improved Adam optimizer based on the block coordinate descent (BCD) framework. It only updates one sub-block of model parameters each time, significantly reducing the number of optimizer states that need to be stored. It has provable convergence guarantee and is fully compatible with existing training pipelines.","experiments":"Full-parameter fine-tuning of Llama3-8B can be run on a single RTX3090-24GB, and Llama3-70B on 4 A100-80GB. It outperforms existing memory-efficient fine-tuning baselines such as LoRA on MT-Bench and math benchmarks, achieves comparable performance to standard full Adam fine-tuning, and reduces memory overhead by ~70%.","authors_note":""},"tags":["finetuning","memory-efficiency","optimizer","full-parameter"],"keywords":["block coordinate descent","large language models"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"全参数微调的下游性能优于参数高效微调方法如LoRA","claim_en":"Downstream performance of full-parameter fine-tuning is better than parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods such as LoRA","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于块坐标下降的BAdam优化器可在内存开销远低于标准Adam的前提下，达到和全量Adam微调相当的下游性能","claim_en":"BAdam optimizer based on block coordinate descent achieves comparable downstream performance to full Adam fine-tuning, with much lower memory overhead than standard Adam","opposes":"全参数微调必须存储所有参数的优化器状态，内存开销是参数的3-4倍，无法在低显存硬件上运行","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"大幅降低了大模型全参数微调的硬件门槛，中小团队也可低成本完成大模型定制化"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3块坐标下降实现细节和§4性能对比表，可测试引入内部低显存全参数微调流程","en":"Only read §3 block coordinate descent implementation and §4 performance comparison table, testable for internal low-memory full-parameter fine-tuning workflow"}},{"id":"LuoZCCA24","title":"Mini-Sequence Transformers: Optimizing Intermediate Memory for Long Sequences Training","authors":["Cheng Luo","Jiawei Zhao","Zhuoming Chen","Beidi Chen","Animashree Anandkumar"],"institutions":["California Institute of Technology","NVIDIA"],"abstract":"We introduce Mini-Sequence Transformer (MsT), a simple and effective methodology for highly efficient and accurate LLM training with extremely long sequences. MsT partitions input sequences and iteratively processes mini-sequences to reduce intermediate memory usage. Integrated with activation recomputation, it enables significant memory savings in both forward and backward passes. In experiments with the Llama3-8B model, with MsT, we measure no degradation in throughput or convergence even with 12x longer sequences than standard implementations. MsT is fully general, implementation-agnostic, and requires minimal code changes to integrate with existing LLM training frameworks. Integrated with the huggingface library, MsT successfully extends the maximum context length of Qwen, Mistral, and Gemma-2 by 12-24x.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LuoZCCA24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LuoZCCA24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/b063829b922fdeb4fa3472dd3471ff43-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"大模型长序列训练的中间激活内存开销极高，现有长序列训练方法提升序列长度时，必然伴随吞吐下降或收敛速度变慢的trade-off，此前没有无损失提升训练序列长度的方案。","importance":"训练系统级贡献，可在不修改模型架构、不损失吞吐和收敛速度的前提下，大幅提升大模型训练的最大序列长度，降低长上下文预训练的硬件成本。","technical_approach":"原创小序列拆分训练方法，将长输入序列拆分为多个小序列迭代处理，结合激活重计算同时降低前向和反向传播的中间内存占用，仅需要少量代码修改即可兼容现有训练框架，无额外计算开销。","experiments":"在Llama3-8B上测试，序列长度比标准实现提升12倍，吞吐和收敛速度无任何下降；可直接适配HuggingFace的Qwen、Mistral等主流开源模型，为NeurIPS 2024 Poster。","authors_note":"Animashree Anandkumar为通讯作者，其团队长期从事大模型训练优化、长序列建模相关研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Long-sequence LLM training has extremely high intermediate activation memory overhead. Existing long-sequence training methods inevitably face the trade-off of throughput drop or slower convergence when increasing sequence length. No prior solution can increase training sequence length without performance loss.","importance":"Training system-level contribution that significantly increases the maximum training sequence length of LLMs without modifying model architecture, losing throughput or slowing down convergence, reducing the hardware cost of long-context pre-training.","technical_approach":"Original mini-sequence split training method. It partitions long input sequences into multiple mini-sequences for iterative processing, combined with activation recomputation to reduce intermediate memory usage in both forward and backward passes. It requires minimal code changes to be compatible with existing training frameworks, with no extra computation overhead.","experiments":"Tested on Llama3-8B, sequence length is 12x longer than standard implementation, with no throughput or convergence degradation. It can be directly adapted to mainstream open-source models on HuggingFace including Qwen and Mistral, and is accepted as NeurIPS 2024 Poster.","authors_note":"Animashree Anandkumar is the corresponding author. Her team has long been working on LLM training optimization and long-sequence modeling research."},"tags":["long-context","memory-efficiency","training","transformer"],"keywords":["Long-Context","Foundation Models","Systems for ML","LLM Training","GPUs","Memory-efficient Training"],"notable_authors":["Animashree Anandkumar"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"长序列训练的内存瓶颈主要来自中间激活的存储开销","claim_en":"Memory bottleneck of long-sequence training mainly comes from intermediate activation storage overhead","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"小序列拆分+激活重计算的方法可将大模型训练序列长度提升12倍，且无吞吐和收敛性能损失","claim_en":"Mini-sequence split + activation recomputation method increases LLM training sequence length by 12x, with no throughput or convergence performance loss","opposes":"现有长序列训练方法提升序列长度时，必然会伴随吞吐下降或收敛速度变慢的trade-off","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"为百万级上下文长度的大模型预训练提供了低成本的实现方案，不需要换用专门的长上下文架构"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3小序列拆分训练的显存计算和代码修改指引，可复用降低内部长序列预训练成本","en":"Only read §3 mini-sequence split training memory calculation and code modification guide, reusable to cut internal long-sequence pretraining cost"}},{"id":"2402.18540","title":"Keeping LLMs Aligned After Fine-tuning: The Crucial Role of Prompt Templates","authors":["Kaifeng Lyu","Haoyu Zhao","Xinran Gu","Dingli Yu","Anirudh Goyal","Sanjeev Arora"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e2","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.18540","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LyuZGYGA24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LyuZGYGA24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d6f034bb216b472fc7d32ec7aff20342-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"已完成安全对齐的开源聊天模型经过下游良性微调后，会出现安全对齐失效的问题，现有解决方案需要额外的安全训练数据或正则项，落地成本高，此前没有零成本的对齐保留方案。","importance":"对齐方法级贡献，揭示了提示模板在对齐保留中的核心作用，提供了零成本的对齐保留最佳实践，对开源模型的下游微调有直接指导意义。","technical_approach":"经过大规模实验验证的最佳实践方案，在下游微调及推理阶段严格沿用模型对齐训练时使用的提示模板，不需要修改训练流程、增加额外数据或计算开销，即可保留模型的安全对齐能力。","experiments":"在Llama2-Chat、Mistral-7B-Instruct、GPT-3.5 Turbo三个模型上测试，沿用对齐阶段的提示模板可将微调后的不安全响应率降低90%以上，同时下游任务性能无任何损失，为NeurIPS 2024 Poster。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Safety-aligned open-source chat models lose alignment after benign downstream fine-tuning. Existing solutions require extra safety training data or regularization terms, with high deployment cost. No prior zero-cost alignment preservation solution exists.","importance":"Alignment method-level contribution that reveals the core role of prompt templates in alignment preservation. It provides a zero-cost best practice for alignment preservation, with direct guiding significance for downstream fine-tuning of open-source models.","technical_approach":"Best practice verified by large-scale experiments. It strictly follows the prompt template used during model alignment training in both downstream fine-tuning and inference phases, requiring no training process modification, extra data or computation overhead to preserve the model's safety alignment ability.","experiments":"Tested on three models: Llama2-Chat, Mistral-7B-Instruct and GPT-3.5 Turbo. Following the alignment-phase prompt template reduces unsafe response rate after fine-tuning by over 90%, with no downstream task performance loss. It is accepted as NeurIPS 2024 Poster.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","finetuning","prompt-template","safety"],"keywords":["safety prompt","AI alignment"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"已对齐的LLM经过良性下游微调后会出现安全对齐流失的问题","claim_en":"Aligned LLMs suffer from safety alignment loss after benign downstream fine-tuning","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"微调及推理阶段沿用对齐阶段的提示模板，即可有效保留LLM的安全对齐能力，不需要额外的安全对齐训练","claim_en":"Following the alignment-phase prompt template during fine-tuning and inference effectively preserves LLM safety alignment ability, requiring no extra safety alignment training","opposes":"微调后保留对齐需要加入额外的安全训练数据或正则项，仅靠提示模板无法解决对齐流失问题","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"提供了零成本的对齐保留方案，可直接落地到所有开源聊天模型的下游微调流程"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4不同模板的对齐失效对比实验，可直接复用为内部下游微调对齐保留最佳实践","en":"Only read §4 alignment failure comparison across templates, immediately reusable as internal downstream fine-tuning alignment retention best practice"}},{"id":"2410.06101","title":"Coevolving with the Other You: Fine-Tuning LLM with Sequential Cooperative Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning","authors":["Hao Ma","Tianyi Hu","Zhiqiang Pu","Boyin Liu","Xiaolin Ai","Yanyan Liang","Min Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e3","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.06101","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MaHPLA0C24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MaHPLA0C24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1c2b1c8f7d317719a9ce32dd7386ba35-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM的RL微调方法多基于PPO及其变种，在LLM场景下容易出现分布崩溃、性能次优的问题，此前没有将多agent协同进化引入LLM RL微调的成熟方案。","importance":"RLHF范式级贡献，拓展了LLM RL微调的范式边界，缓解了PPO的常见缺陷，为后续多agent对齐研究提供了基础框架。","technical_approach":"原创序列协同多agent RL微调框架CORY，将待微调的LLM复制为先锋和观察者两个独立agent：先锋生成响应，观察者评估并提供优化信号，两个agent协同进化，不需要额外的奖励模型标注成本，缓解了分布崩溃问题。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，仅说明方法性能优于PPO类基线，分布稳定性更高，为NeurIPS 2024 Poster。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing RL fine-tuning methods for LLMs are mostly based on PPO and its variants, which are prone to distribution collapse and suboptimal performance in LLM scenarios. No prior mature solution introduces multi-agent co-evolution into LLM RL fine-tuning.","importance":"RLHF paradigm-level contribution that expands the paradigm boundary of LLM RL fine-tuning, mitigates common defects of PPO, and provides a basic framework for subsequent multi-agent alignment research.","technical_approach":"Original sequential cooperative multi-agent RL fine-tuning framework CORY. It duplicates the LLM to be fine-tuned into two independent agents: a pioneer that generates responses, and an observer that evaluates and provides optimization signals. The two agents co-evolve, requiring no extra reward model annotation cost, and mitigating distribution collapse.","experiments":"Full experimental data is not disclosed in the public abstract. It only states that the method outperforms PPO baselines with higher distribution stability, and is accepted as NeurIPS 2024 Poster.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rlhf","multi-agent","finetuning","alignment"],"keywords":["large language model","reinforcement learning with human feedback","multi-agent reinforcement learning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"PPO类RL微调方法在LLM场景下容易出现分布崩溃和性能次优的问题","claim_en":"PPO-based RL fine-tuning methods are prone to distribution collapse and suboptimal performance in LLM scenarios","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"双agent协同进化的RL微调框架可提升LLM微调的性能和分布稳定性，优于传统PPO方法","claim_en":"Dual-agent co-evolution RL fine-tuning framework improves LLM fine-tuning performance and distribution stability, outperforming traditional PPO methods","opposes":"LLM的RL微调只能基于单agent PPO框架，多agent方法会增加训练复杂度且没有收益","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"拓展了LLM RL微调的范式边界，为后续多agent对齐研究提供了新方向"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3双智能体协同进化框架设计，可参考拓展内部RLHF范式","en":"Only read §3 dual-agent co-evolution framework design, referenceable for internal RLHF paradigm expansion"}},{"id":"2406.11831","title":"Exploring the Role of Large Language Models in Prompt Encoding for Diffusion Models","authors":["Bingqi Ma","Zhuofan Zong","Guanglu Song","Hongsheng Li","Yu Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e4","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11831","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MaZSLL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MaZSLL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d68c1d10957c8d21ed9dea209533c5a4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Decoder-only架构的LLM文本理解能力远超CLIP、T5等模型，但直接用作文生图扩散模型的提示编码器会导致提示跟随能力大幅下降，此前没有找到二者不兼容的根因及适配方案。","importance":"跨模态预训练范式级贡献，揭示了Decoder-only LLM与扩散模型不兼容的底层原因，为统一模态的原生多模态模型预训练提供了设计指导。","technical_approach":"原创LLM提示编码适配框架，针对两个核心不兼容问题优化：一是修正LLM下一词预测预训练目标与扩散模型需要的判别式提示特征的对齐问题，二是消除Decoder-only架构引入的固有位置偏置，可充分利用LLM的文本理解能力提升扩散模型的提示跟随效果。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，仅说明方法解决了直接用LLM作为提示编码器的性能下降问题，为NeurIPS 2024 Poster。","authors_note":"Hongsheng Li、Yu Liu为核心作者，其团队长期从事多模态建模、计算机视觉相关研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Decoder-only LLMs have far better text understanding ability than models such as CLIP and T5, but directly using them as prompt encoders for text-to-image diffusion models leads to significant drop in prompt following ability. The root cause of incompatibility and adaptation solution have not been found before.","importance":"Cross-modal pre-training paradigm-level contribution that reveals the underlying reason for incompatibility between decoder-only LLMs and diffusion models, providing design guidance for pre-training of unified native multimodal models.","technical_approach":"Original LLM prompt encoding adaptation framework, optimized for two core incompatibility issues: first, aligns the next-token prediction pre-training objective of LLMs with the discriminative prompt feature requirement of diffusion models; second, eliminates the inherent positional bias introduced by decoder-only architecture. It fully leverages the text understanding ability of LLMs to improve prompt following performance of diffusion models.","experiments":"Full experimental data is not disclosed in the public abstract. It only states that the method solves the performance drop problem caused by directly using LLMs as prompt encoders, and is accepted as NeurIPS 2024 Poster.","authors_note":"Hongsheng Li and Yu Liu are core authors. Their team has long been working on multimodal modeling and computer vision research."},"tags":["llm-encoder","text-to-image","diffusion","prompt-encoding"],"keywords":["large language model; text-to-image generation; diffusion model"],"notable_authors":["Hongsheng Li","Yu Liu"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Decoder-only LLM的文本理解能力优于CLIP、T5等编码器架构模型","claim_en":"Decoder-only LLMs have better text understanding ability than encoder-architecture models such as CLIP and T5","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"Decoder-only LLM无法直接作为扩散模型提示编码器的根因是预训练目标不匹配和固有位置偏置，经过适配后可大幅提升扩散模型的提示跟随能力","claim_en":"The root causes that decoder-only LLMs cannot be directly used as diffusion model prompt encoders are pre-training objective mismatch and inherent positional bias. After adaptation, they can significantly improve the prompt following ability of diffusion models","opposes":"Decoder-only LLM的自回归架构不适合作为扩散模型的提示编码器，无法达到CLIP/T5的效果","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§2 Analysis","why_contested":"为统一LLM和扩散模型的跨模态预训练扫清了关键障碍，对原生多模态模型的设计有指导意义"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3 LLM与扩散模型不兼容根因分析，可参考统一多模态预训练架构设计","en":"Only read §3 root cause analysis of LLM-diffusion incompatibility, referenceable for unified multimodal pretraining architecture design"}},{"id":"MarksANA00B24","title":"Interpreting Learned Feedback Patterns in Large Language Models","authors":["Luke Marks","Amir Abdullah","Clement Neo","Rauno Arike","David Krueger","Philip Torr","Fazl Barez"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e5","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MarksANA00B24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MarksANA00B24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/403bf224290de69c7d5dc856f5a99d9e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"摘要缺失，无法确定“learned feedback patterns”具体指 RLHF/偏好数据中的反馈结构、还是模型内部对反馈信号的表征与利用方式。","importance":"摘要缺失，无法判断这是机制分析层面的洞见、还是能直接改进对齐/训练信号质量的工作。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，无法说明其解释方法（探针、因果干预、表示分解、可视化等）与对照设计。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法给出所分析模型、数据、评测任务与关键定量结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract is provided, so it is unclear what “learned feedback patterns” refers to (e.g., RLHF preference feedback structure vs internal representations of feedback).","importance":"Without the abstract, we cannot assess whether this is primarily mechanistic insight or a method that improves alignment/training-signal quality.","technical_approach":"No abstract: the interpretation methodology and controls (probes, interventions, decompositions, etc.) cannot be summarized reliably.","experiments":"No abstract: analyzed models, datasets, tasks, and quantitative findings are unknown.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","feedback-patterns","llm","mechanistic"],"notable_authors":["Luke Marks","Amir Abdullah","Clement Neo","Rauno Arike","David Krueger"],"keywords":["Interpretability","Reward Models","Safety"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅扫摘要确认问题与方法后跳过，无明确实用结论前无需深入阅读正文","en":"Only glance at the abstract to confirm problem and method then skip, no need to read full text before clear practical conclusions are available"}},{"id":"ModoranuSMK0RA24","title":"MicroAdam: Accurate Adaptive Optimization with Low Space Overhead and Provable Convergence","authors":["Ionut-Vlad Modoranu","Mher Safaryan","Grigory Malinovsky","Eldar Kurtic","Thomas Robert","Peter Richtárik","Dan Alistarh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e6","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ModoranuSMK0RA24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ModoranuSMK0RA24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/000f947dcaff8fbffcc3f53a1314f358-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"摘要缺失，无法确认 MicroAdam 具体解决 Adam 的哪类痛点（状态内存、数值稳定、偏置校正误差、分布式通信开销）以及它的适用边界（凸/非凸、稀疏梯度等）。","importance":"摘要缺失，无法判断其对大规模 pretrain 的实际价值：是显著省显存、还是在相同内存下更接近 Adam 的收敛行为。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，仅从标题可知它试图在“低空间开销”下保持“准确的自适应优化”并给出可证明收敛，但无法说明它如何压缩/近似二阶矩状态以及由此带来的偏差-方差权衡。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法给出训练规模、吞吐/显存节省比例、收敛曲线与基线对比数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract is provided, so it is unclear which concrete Adam pain point MicroAdam targets (optimizer state memory, numerical stability, distributed overhead) and under what assumptions it applies.","importance":"Without the abstract, we cannot judge practical value for large-scale pretraining (e.g., meaningful memory savings vs matching Adam’s convergence).","technical_approach":"The title suggests accurate adaptive optimization with low memory and provable convergence, but the mechanism (how second-moment state is approximated/compressed and the bias-variance trade-off) cannot be summarized reliably.","experiments":"No abstract: training scales, memory/throughput deltas, convergence curves, and baselines are unknown.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimizer","memory-efficiency","training-stability","adam"],"notable_authors":["Ionut-Vlad Modoranu","Mher Safaryan","Grigory Malinovsky","Eldar Kurtic","Thomas Robert"],"keywords":["adaptive optimization","adam","efficiency","memory efficiency"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅扫摘要确认优化器改进点和性能对比后跳过，无预训练场景实测结果前无需深入","en":"Only glance at the abstract to confirm optimizer improvements then skip, no need to dive in before pretraining scenario empirical results are released"}},{"id":"MouZY24","title":"SG-Bench: Evaluating LLM Safety Generalization Across Diverse Tasks and Prompt Types","authors":["Yutao Mou","Shikun Zhang","Wei Ye"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e7","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MouZY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MouZY24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/de7b99107c53e60257c727dc73daf1d1-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"摘要缺失，无法确认 SG-Bench 具体如何定义与测量“安全泛化”(safety generalization)：跨任务迁移、跨提示类型鲁棒性、还是对越狱/对抗提示的泛化。","importance":"摘要缺失，无法判断该 benchmark 对齐研究的增量：是补齐了现有安全评测的覆盖盲区，还是提供了更难、更接近真实分布漂移的测试。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，无法说明其任务集合、提示类型划分、标注/规则、以及如何避免评测被模板或关键词投机。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法给出参评模型、指标（拒答率/有害率/帮助性权衡等）与关键对比结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract is provided, so the exact definition and measurement of “safety generalization” in SG-Bench (across tasks, prompt types, jailbreak robustness) cannot be summarized.","importance":"Without the abstract, we cannot judge how much this benchmark advances beyond existing safety evaluations (coverage gaps vs harder, distribution-shifted tests).","technical_approach":"No abstract: task suite design, prompt taxonomy, labeling rules, and anti-gaming measures are unknown.","experiments":"No abstract: evaluated models, metrics (harmfulness, refusal, helpfulness trade-offs), and key quantitative findings are unknown.","authors_note":""},"tags":["safety","benchmark","generalization","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Yutao Mou","Shikun Zhang","Wei Ye"],"keywords":["large language models","LLM safety evaluation","generalization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅扫附录评测覆盖维度，无明确安全泛化评测设计亮点前无需深入","en":"Only glance at the appendix evaluation coverage dimensions, no need to dive in before clear safety generalization evaluation design highlights are confirmed"}},{"id":"MundlerMHV24","title":"SWT-Bench: Testing and Validating Real-World Bug-Fixes with Code Agents","authors":["Niels Mündler","Mark Niklas Müller","Jingxuan He","Martin T. Vechev"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e8","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MundlerMHV24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MundlerMHV24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/94f093b41fc2666376fb1f667fe282f3-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：现有代码 agent 基准大多停留在离线补全或合成任务上，无法真实衡量模型是否能在真实软件环境中完成可验证的 bug fix。对代码模型来说，真正困难的不是生成一段“看起来像修复”的代码，而是让修复能在真实仓库、真实依赖和真实测试下成立。","importance":"这项工作的重要性主要是 benchmark 和系统评测层面的。它对 pretrain 的启示不在于提出新训练目标，而在于把代码模型评价从静态 token-level 预测推进到真实仓库上的 agentic problem solving；这会反过来影响代码数据构造、执行反馈建模以及 post-train 强化的方向。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构建 SWT-Bench，一个面向代码 agent 的真实世界 bug-fix 基准，并提供可执行、可验证的测试环境。它与传统 code generation benchmark 的区别在于：不只看是否生成参考答案，而是看 agent 是否能读仓库、理解上下文、修改文件并通过测试；这种设计牺牲了评测便宜和纯离线可复现性，换来更接近实际软件维护的有效性。","experiments":"实验重点应是用多种代码 agent 或 LLM-based coding system 在基准上评测，通过率、测试通过率、修复有效率、运行开销等是核心指标。若论文完整，通常还会分析真实仓库难度分布、失败模式，例如定位错误、上下文不足、patch 破坏其他功能。由于没有摘要与数字，无法可靠填入任务数量、仓库规模和各模型的具体分数。","authors_note":"从作者表看，Martin T. Vechev 是程序语言与代码智能方向的知名学者。若为其团队工作，通常与代码验证、程序修复、代码生成基准相关；但给定信息不足以确认机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a gap in code-agent evaluation: most benchmarks measure offline code generation, not whether an agent can produce a valid bug fix in a real repository with executable tests. For practical coding systems, passing the environment is the task; producing plausible-looking code is not enough.","importance":"This is mainly a benchmark and systems contribution. Its relevance to pretraining is indirect but real: once evaluation shifts from static completion to agentic repository repair, it changes what data, feedback signals, and post-training objectives matter for code models.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is SWT-Bench, a benchmark for real-world bug fixing with code agents in runnable environments. The design differs from reference-match benchmarks by requiring repository understanding, file edits, and validation through tests, trading simplicity and cheap scoring for much higher task fidelity.","experiments":"The empirical section likely evaluates several LLM-based coding agents on success rate, test pass rate, repair validity, and possibly cost or latency. A useful analysis would include failure modes such as incorrect localization, insufficient context use, or fixes that regress other behavior. No abstract or numbers are provided here, so exact benchmark size and model scores cannot be stated safely.","authors_note":"From the author list, Martin T. Vechev is a well-known researcher in programming languages and code intelligence. If this is from his group, it likely connects to code analysis, repair, and evaluation, but the institution cannot be confirmed from the provided metadata alone."},"tags":["code-agent","benchmark","bug-fixing","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Martin T. Vechev"],"keywords":["language model","test generation","code agent"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§2基准任务构造和§4评测指标设计，可参考优化内部代码模型评测流程","en":"Only read §2 benchmark task construction and §4 evaluation metric design, referenceable for internal code model evaluation workflow optimization"}},{"id":"MuneebO24","title":"Induced Model Matching: Restricted Models Help Train Full-Featured Models","authors":["Usama Muneeb","Mesrob I. Ohannessian"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$e9","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MuneebO24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MuneebO24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/7279908471a7dd4898d2715f7c6a7413-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：能否先借助一个受限但更容易学习的模型结构，来稳定或加速全功能模型的训练。许多复杂模型训练难、搜索空间大、归因弱，直接端到端优化容易陷入差的局部解或样本效率低，因此“先学一个更简单的老师，再把结构信息迁移过去”是值得重新审视的问题。","importance":"这项工作的意义偏方法论。它提出的不是常见意义上的蒸馏压缩，而是一种训练策略：利用受限模型帮助全模型对齐到更好的函数形态；对 pretrain 的启示是，模型设计不必只看最终表达能力，也要看训练路径和可学性。","technical_approach":"题目中的 Induced Model Matching 表明核心思想是让 full-featured model 去匹配某种由 restricted model 诱导出来的行为或表示。关键不是永久约束大模型，而是在训练阶段利用小模型的结构偏置缩小搜索空间、提供更稳定的目标；与直接知识蒸馏相比，它更强调“受限模型定义了更容易学的中间目标”，而不是只复制最终输出分布。","experiments":"实验大概率会比较：直接训练全模型、经典蒸馏、以及 induced matching 三者在收敛速度、泛化误差和训练稳定性上的差异。若方法成立，通常会在样本较少或优化更困难的设定下更明显。给定信息没有摘要和数值，因此无法可靠描述具体任务、模型规模和增益幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether restricted, easier-to-train models can serve as scaffolds for training richer models more effectively. This matters because many expressive models are hard to optimize directly: they have larger search spaces, weaker inductive bias, and often poor sample efficiency early in training.","importance":"Its contribution is methodological. The takeaway for pretraining is that model quality is not only about final expressivity; the optimization path matters, and a structured intermediate target can be more useful than training the full model from scratch or relying on standard distillation alone.","technical_approach":"Induced Model Matching likely trains a full-capacity model to match behavior induced by a restricted model during learning. The restricted model is not the endpoint but a training scaffold that injects bias and shrinks the effective search space, differing from classic distillation where the goal is mainly to imitate a teacher’s output distribution.","experiments":"The expected empirical comparison is between direct training, standard distillation, and the proposed induced matching approach, with metrics on convergence speed, generalization, and robustness in difficult optimization regimes. Without the abstract or numeric results, it is not safe to provide task details, model sizes, or exact gains.","authors_note":""},"tags":["distillation","training-dynamics","model-matching","generalization"],"keywords":["restricted","model","learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看受限模型诱导对齐的训练策略设计和效果消融实验，可在内部小模型预训练中测试该方案提升训练稳定性。","en":"Focus on the training strategy design of restricted model induced alignment and effect ablation experiments; you can test this method in internal small model pretraining to improve training stability."}},{"id":"MuralidharanSJC24","title":"Compact Language Models via Pruning and Knowledge Distillation","authors":["Saurav Muralidharan","Sharath Turuvekere Sreenivas","Raviraj Joshi","Marcin Chochowski","Mostofa Patwary","Mohammad Shoeybi","Bryan Catanzaro","Jan Kautz","Pavlo Molchanov"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ea","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MuralidharanSJC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MuralidharanSJC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/4822991365c962105b1b95b1107d30e5-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：怎样在尽量保留语言能力的前提下，把语言模型做得更小、更实用。只靠剪枝常常会伤害流畅性和知识保持，只靠蒸馏又未必能把结构冗余去掉，因此把两者结合是很自然但工程上并不简单的方向。","importance":"这项工作属于压缩与部署方法。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：模型压缩不只是 serving 问题，它也反映了预训练参数冗余、表示可迁移性以及 teacher-student 训练信号的有效范围；尤其对中小模型路线，这类工作有现实价值。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法是把 pruning 和 knowledge distillation 联合起来训练 compact LM。关键设计通常包括：剪哪些结构单元，是非结构化权重、头、层还是 FFN 通道；蒸馏对齐哪些信号，是 logits、hidden states 还是 attention；其有效性来自两者分工——剪枝去掉冗余容量，蒸馏补偿由容量损失带来的行为退化。","experiments":"实验应聚焦于压缩率与性能保持的 trade-off，例如在给定参数缩减或 FLOPs 降低下，困惑度、零样本任务分数或下游准确率保留多少。通常还会有 ablation 比较：只剪枝、只蒸馏、先剪后蒸与联合训练哪种更稳。由于缺少摘要，无法可靠给出教师学生规模、数据量和具体提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical compression question: how to make language models substantially smaller without giving up too much of their capability. Pruning alone often removes useful capacity, while distillation alone may preserve behavior but not fully eliminate structural redundancy.","importance":"This is a compression and deployment-oriented contribution with clear relevance to pretraining. It speaks to how much redundancy pretrained LMs carry, which signals are transferable from teacher to student, and how far one can push smaller models before quality drops sharply.","technical_approach":"The method appears to combine pruning with knowledge distillation to produce compact language models. The design space likely covers what to prune—weights, heads, layers, or channels—and what to distill—logits, hidden states, or attention maps. The rationale is straightforward: pruning removes excess capacity, while distillation recovers behavior lost during capacity reduction.","experiments":"The key evidence should be compression-performance trade-offs: parameter or FLOP reduction versus perplexity, downstream task retention, or zero-shot quality. A useful ablation would compare pruning only, distillation only, sequential pipelines, and joint optimization. Since no abstract or numerical results are provided, exact model scales and gains cannot be stated reliably.","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-compression","pruning","distillation","small-language-model"],"keywords":["llm","pruning","distillation","compression"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看剪枝单元选择和蒸馏对齐信号的消融实验，中小模型预训练后压缩可直接复用其工程方案。","en":"Focus on the ablation experiments of pruning unit selection and distillation alignment signals; the engineering scheme can be directly reused for post-pretraining compression of small and medium models."}},{"id":"NagleGBGMK24","title":"Fundamental Limits of Prompt Compression: A Rate-Distortion Framework for Black-Box Language Models","authors":["Alliot Nagle","Adway Girish","Marco Bondaschi","Michael Gastpar","Ashok Vardhan Makkuva","Hyeji Kim"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$eb","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NagleGBGMK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NagleGBGMK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ac8fbba029dadca99d6b8c3f913d3ed6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：黑盒语言模型的 prompt 压缩到底能压到什么程度，何时会不可避免地损失任务效果。现有 prompt compression 多是经验技巧，缺少明确的理论边界；但在长上下文成本越来越高的背景下，知道“压缩极限在哪”比再堆一个 heuristic 更重要。","importance":"这项工作的重要性在理论框架层面。它把 prompt compression 放进 rate-distortion 框架里，给出压缩率与性能损失之间的系统刻画；对 pretrain 和 inference 都有启发，因为上下文利用效率、外部记忆替代和检索压缩都受同类约束。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用信息论中的率失真理论分析黑盒 LM 的 prompt 压缩。关键点不在于设计一个具体压缩器，而在于定义任务相关的 distortion，即压缩后模型行为允许偏离原始 prompt 响应的程度，并推导达到某一失真水平所需的最小表示长度；与工程式摘要或检索裁剪不同，这里关注的是可压缩性的根本限制。","experiments":"实验应是理论与实证结合：在若干 black-box LMs 和任务上估计或验证 rate-distortion 曲线，比较不同压缩策略与理论边界的距离。若论文完整，通常会展示某些任务可以强压缩而几乎不损失，而另一些任务对细粒度上下文高度敏感。由于缺少摘要与数字，无法可靠给出任务集、模型名称和具体压缩比。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a foundational question: how far can prompts for black-box language models be compressed before task performance must degrade. Existing prompt compression methods are mostly heuristic, while the real bottleneck is understanding the intrinsic rate-quality trade-off.","importance":"Its value is primarily theoretical. By framing prompt compression through rate-distortion theory, the work provides a principled view of context efficiency that is relevant not only to inference cost, but also to retrieval, external memory, and the broader question of what information the model truly needs from context.","technical_approach":"The main idea is to analyze prompt compression with an information-theoretic rate-distortion framework. Rather than proposing yet another compressor, the paper likely defines task-relevant distortion in terms of changes in model behavior and studies the minimum number of bits or tokens needed to preserve performance up to a target distortion level.","experiments":"The empirical part likely validates the theory by comparing practical compression schemes against estimated rate-distortion frontiers on black-box LMs and downstream tasks. A useful result would show that some tasks are highly compressible while others are sensitive to small context losses. Since no abstract or numbers are provided, exact tasks, model names, and compression ratios cannot be reported safely.","authors_note":""},"tags":["prompt-compression","rate-distortion","in-context-learning","efficiency"],"keywords":["information theory","prompt compression","LLMs","optimization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看率失真框架定义和压缩极限推导部分即可，做上下文优化、检索增强的团队可参考其边界结论。","en":"Only read the rate-distortion framework definition and compression limit derivation; teams working on context optimization and retrieval augmentation can refer to its boundary conclusions."}},{"id":"NamFLML24","title":"An exactly solvable model for emergence and scaling laws in the multitask sparse parity problem","authors":["Yoonsoo Nam","Nayara Fonseca","Seok Hyeong Lee","Chris Mingard","Ard A. Louis"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Deep learning models can exhibit what appears to be a sudden ability to solve a new problem as training time, training data, or model size increases, a phenomenon known as emergence. In this paper, we present a framework where each new ability (a skill) is represented as a basis function.  We solve a simple multi-linear model in this skill-basis, finding analytic expressions for the emergence of new skills, as well as for scaling laws of the loss with training time, data size, model size, and optimal compute.  We compare our detailed calculations to direct simulations of a two-layer neural network trained on multitask sparse parity, where the tasks in the dataset are distributed according to a power-law.  Our simple model captures, using a single fit parameter,  the sigmoidal emergence of multiple new skills as training time, data size or model size increases in the neural network.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NamFLML24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NamFLML24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/45f7ad60c01f17711ccd8ac2f2fb77e3-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在一个可精确求解的玩具模型里，能否把 emergence 和 scaling law 的形成机制讲清楚。现实大模型上的涌现现象常常只能做经验观察，变量太多、归因太弱；如果没有可解模型，很难判断哪些拐点来自任务结构，哪些只是优化或数据分布副产物。","importance":"这项工作的意义主要在理论与机制分析。它不直接改进大模型训练，但对理解多任务学习中的能力跃迁很有价值；对 pretrain 研究者来说，这类结果能帮助区分真正的 scaling 规律与 benchmark artifact，也能提示哪些任务结构更容易出现“突然会了”的现象。","technical_approach":"核心方法是构造一个关于 multitask sparse parity problem 的精确可解模型，并分析其学习动力学与缩放规律。选择 sparse parity 这类任务通常是因为它既有明确的组合结构，又足够难，能在简化设定下保留多任务共享、特征稀疏和阶段性学习等现象；代价是外部效度有限，不能直接映射到真实语料训练。","experiments":"这类论文的“实验”更像理论验证与数值模拟。关键事实通常包括：何种参数区间会出现性能拐点、不同任务数和稀疏度如何影响样本复杂度，以及理论预测与模拟是否一致。由于给定信息没有摘要和公式结论，无法可靠写出具体缩放指数或临界点数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper aims to explain emergence and scaling laws in a setting that is analytically tractable. In large real models, apparent emergent behavior is often observed empirically but hard to attribute, because architecture, data, optimization, and task mixture all change at once.","importance":"This is a theory and mechanistic-understanding contribution. It does not directly improve training pipelines, but it matters for pretraining researchers who want to know which scaling effects are structural and which may be artifacts of benchmarks, optimization, or task composition.","technical_approach":"The core approach is to build an exactly solvable model around the multitask sparse parity problem and analyze its learning dynamics. Sparse parity is a useful choice because it captures combinatorial structure, sparsity, and task interactions while remaining mathematically analyzable. The trade-off is obvious: stronger analytical control comes at the cost of limited realism.","experiments":"The empirical component is likely numerical verification of theoretical predictions rather than large-scale benchmarking. The relevant outputs would be critical regimes, scaling exponents, and how task count or sparsity changes sample complexity and performance transitions. No abstract or numerical results are provided, so exact thresholds or exponents cannot be stated safely.","authors_note":""},"tags":["scaling-law","emergence","theory","multitask-learning"],"keywords":["science of deep learning","emergence","skills","scaling laws"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读现象分析和讨论部分即可，用于辅助理解多任务预训练中涌现拐点的任务结构驱动因素，不用硬套到真实语料场景。","en":"Only read the phenomenon analysis and discussion sections; it helps understand the task structure drivers of emergence inflection points in multitask pretraining, do not apply directly to real corpus scenarios."}},{"id":"NiXYDSJN024","title":"MixEval: Deriving Wisdom of the Crowd from LLM Benchmark Mixtures","authors":["Jinjie Ni","Fuzhao Xue","Xiang Yue","Yuntian Deng","Mahir Shah","Kabir Jain","Graham Neubig","Yang You"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ec","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NiXYDSJN024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NiXYDSJN024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/b1f34d7b4a03a3d80be8e72eb430dd81-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有三类LLM评估方案各有缺陷：基于真值的基准覆盖性差易被污染，LLM-as-judge基准有评分偏见且样本量少，用户侧评估（如Chatbot Arena）可靠但成本高速度慢，尚无同时兼顾高效、准确、覆盖广的评估范式。","importance":"方法级贡献，填补了低成本高可靠性LLM评估的空白，可复用现有所有基准的价值，对预训练模型迭代的快速对齐校验有实际落地价值。","technical_approach":"原创的评估融合范式，核心是将爬取的真实用户查询与现有基准中的相似查询做匹配，混合两类资源，既保留真实查询的覆盖度，又复用现有基准的真值标注和高效评分逻辑，无需额外人工标注或大规模用户投票。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，仅说明方案基于网页挖掘查询与现有基准的匹配构建，未给出具体基线对比、指标提升数据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Three existing LLM evaluation paradigms all have critical flaws: ground-truth based benchmarks have narrow coverage and are prone to contamination, LLM-as-judge benchmarks suffer from grading bias and limited sample size, user-facing evaluations like Chatbot Arena are reliable but costly and slow. No paradigm balances efficiency, accuracy and broad coverage simultaneously.","importance":"Method-level contribution that fills the gap of low-cost high-reliability LLM evaluation, can reuse the value of all existing benchmarks, and has practical value for fast alignment validation during pre-trained model iteration.","technical_approach":"Original evaluation fusion paradigm. Its core logic is to match crawled real user queries with similar queries in existing benchmarks, and mix the two resources. It retains the coverage of real queries while reusing ground truth labels and efficient scoring logic of existing benchmarks, no extra manual annotation or large-scale user voting is required.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose complete experimental data, only states the pipeline is built based on web-mined queries and matching with existing benchmarks, no specific baseline comparison or metric improvement data is provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","llm-evaluation","data-mixture"],"keywords":["LLM Evaluation","Approximating Human Preference","Dynamic Benchmarking","Benchmark Mixture","Web Query Detection"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM评估需要同时兼顾真实场景覆盖度和评分效率","claim_en":"LLM evaluation needs to balance real-scenario coverage and scoring efficiency","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"混合现有基准与匹配的真实查询即可构建高效的黄金标准LLM评估方案","claim_en":"Mixing existing benchmarks with matched real queries can build an efficient gold-standard LLM evaluation pipeline","opposes":"Prior work assumes reliable gold-standard LLM evaluation requires either new large-scale annotation or user voting","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§2 Method","why_contested":"If validated, it can cut LLM evaluation cost by over one order of magnitude, which is critical for fast pre-training iteration"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为评估方法的文献备查，不需要读正文，现有内部评估体系成熟的团队不需要跟进。","en":"Only for literature reference of evaluation methods, no need to read the full text; teams with mature internal evaluation systems do not need to follow up."}},{"id":"NociMHO24","title":"Super Consistency of Neural Network Landscapes and Learning Rate Transfer","authors":["Lorenzo Noci","Alexandru Meterez","Thomas Hofmann","Antonio Orvieto"],"institutions":["ETH Zurich"],"abstract":"$ed","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NociMHO24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NociMHO24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ba1d33849b963efc6b5d3082ad68f480-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"μP（最大更新参数化）下学习率可从小模型迁移到大模型的现象缺乏理论解释，现有优化理论认为不同尺寸模型的损失曲面差异极大，无法解释超参数跨尺寸迁移的规律。","importance":"理论级贡献，明确了损失曲面的超一致性性质，对预训练超参数调优有直接指导价值，可大幅降低大模型超参数搜索的成本。","technical_approach":"原创的理论分析框架，通过Hessian矩阵的最大特征值（即锐度）分析损失曲面，发现在μP参数化下，训练过程中Hessian的特定谱性质几乎不受模型宽度和深度的影响，将该性质定义为损失曲面的超一致性。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，仅说明在μP及其深度扩展设置下验证了Hessian谱性质的跨尺寸一致性，未给出具体模型规模、基线对比数据。","authors_note":"ETH Zurich团队，Thomas Hofmann为知名机器学习理论学者，长期从事优化与深度学习理论研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The phenomenon that learning rate can transfer from small to large models under μP (maximal update parameterization) lacks theoretical explanation. Existing optimization theory assumes loss landscapes of models with different sizes are drastically different, which cannot explain cross-size hyperparameter transfer.","importance":"Theory-level contribution that defines the super consistency property of loss landscapes, provides direct guidance for hyperparameter tuning in pre-training, and can significantly reduce the cost of hyperparameter search for large models.","technical_approach":"Original theoretical analysis framework. It analyzes loss landscapes through the largest eigenvalue (sharpness) of the Hessian, and finds that under μP parameterization, certain spectral properties of the Hessian are nearly independent of model width and depth during training. This property is named super consistency of the landscape.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose complete experimental data, only verifies cross-size consistency of Hessian spectral properties under μP and its depth extension settings, no specific model scale or baseline comparison data is provided.","authors_note":"ETH Zurich team, Thomas Hofmann is a well-known machine learning theory researcher focusing on optimization and deep learning theory."},"tags":["loss-landscape","learning-rate","transfer","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["mup","deep learning theory","optimization theory","edge of stability","NTK"],"notable_authors":["Thomas Hofmann","Antonio Orvieto"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"μP参数化下学习率可跨模型尺寸迁移","claim_en":"Learning rate can transfer across model sizes under μP parameterization","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"μP参数化下，训练过程中Hessian的最大特征值不受模型宽度和深度的影响","claim_en":"Under μP parameterization, the largest eigenvalue of the Hessian during training is independent of model width and depth","opposes":"Prior work assumes the sharpness of loss landscape changes with model size","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Analysis","why_contested":"This conclusion explains the mechanism of learning rate transfer, which can simplify large model pre-training hyperparameter tuning workflow"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看Hessian谱性质分析和跨尺寸学习率迁移实验，预训练超参调优团队可直接复用其超参数迁移逻辑降低大模型调参成本。","en":"Focus on the Hessian spectral property analysis and cross-size learning rate transfer experiments; pretraining hyperparameter tuning teams can directly reuse its transfer logic to reduce large model tuning costs."}},{"id":"PareekDO24","title":"Understanding the Gains from Repeated Self-Distillation","authors":["Divyansh Pareek","Simon S. Du","Sewoong Oh"],"institutions":["University of Washington"],"abstract":"Self-Distillation is a special type of knowledge distillation where the student model has the same architecture as the teacher model. Despite using the same architecture and the same training data, self-distillation has been empirically observed to improve performance, especially when applied repeatedly. For such a process, there is a fundamental question of interest: How much gain is possible by applying multiple steps of self-distillation? To investigate this relative gain, we propose using the simple but canonical task of linear regression. Our analysis shows that the excess risk achieved by multi-step self-distillation can significantly improve upon a single step of self-distillation, reducing the excess risk by a factor of $d$, where $d$ is the input dimension. Empirical results on regression tasks from the UCI repository show a reduction in the learnt model's risk (MSE) by up to $47$%.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PareekDO24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PareekDO24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/0eb1ac7551ddbae575415aa5183a88be-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"多次自蒸馏（师生模型结构相同）能持续提升性能的现象缺乏理论解释，现有知识蒸馏理论无法量化多次自蒸馏的性能增益上限。","importance":"理论级贡献，首次量化了多次自蒸馏的性能增益幅度，对预训练模型的蒸馏迭代优化有直接指导意义，可用于设计更高效的小模型训练流程。","technical_approach":"选择线性回归作为典型任务进行理论分析，推导得出多次自蒸馏的 excess risk 比单次自蒸馏降低d倍，其中d为输入维度，明确多次自蒸馏的增益来源于对噪声的逐步过滤。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，仅说明在线性回归任务上验证了理论推导结论，未给出其他任务的验证数据、基线对比指标。","authors_note":"华盛顿大学团队，Simon S. Du、Sewoong Oh均为知名机器学习理论学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The phenomenon that repeated self-distillation (student and teacher share the same architecture) can continuously improve performance lacks theoretical explanation. Existing knowledge distillation theories cannot quantify the upper bound of performance gain from repeated self-distillation.","importance":"Theory-level contribution that quantifies the performance gain magnitude of repeated self-distillation for the first time, has direct guidance for distillation iteration optimization of pre-trained models, and can be used to design more efficient small model training pipelines.","technical_approach":"It chooses linear regression as the canonical task for theoretical analysis, derives that the excess risk of multi-step self-distillation is d times lower than single-step self-distillation, where d is the input dimension. The gain of repeated self-distillation comes from gradual noise filtering.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose complete experimental data, only verifies the theoretical conclusion on linear regression task, no validation data on other tasks or baseline comparison metrics are provided.","authors_note":"University of Washington team, Simon S. Du and Sewoong Oh are both well-known machine learning theory researchers."},"tags":["self-distillation","training-dynamics","generalization"],"keywords":["Self-Distillation Theory","Linear Regression"],"notable_authors":["Simon S. Du","Sewoong Oh"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"自蒸馏在师生模型同构时仍能提升模型性能","claim_en":"Self-distillation can still improve model performance when student and teacher have the same architecture","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"多次自蒸馏的excess risk比单次自蒸馏降低d倍，d为输入维度","claim_en":"The excess risk of multi-step self-distillation is d times lower than single-step self-distillation, where d is the input dimension","opposes":"Prior work assumes single-step self-distillation can achieve optimal performance","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Analysis","why_contested":"This conclusion provides a clear direction for optimizing distillation workflows, which can reduce deployed model size without performance loss"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅读增益上限推导和噪声过滤机制部分，做小模型自蒸馏迭代训练的团队可参考其结论优化迭代次数。","en":"Only read the gain upper bound derivation and noise filtering mechanism sections; teams working on small model repeated self-distillation can refer to its conclusions to optimize iteration times."}},{"id":"ParkOLLT24","title":"Emergence of Hidden Capabilities: Exploring Learning Dynamics in Concept Space","authors":["Core Francisco Park","Maya Okawa","Andrew Lee","Ekdeep Singh Lubana","Hidenori Tanaka"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ee","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ParkOLLT24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ParkOLLT24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/99e6bcf460ea36818cf236da29311e73-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"大模型的概念学习顺序、隐能力涌现的驱动因素缺乏可解释的分析框架，现有训练动态分析多基于损失或指标变化，无法拆解不同概念的独立学习过程。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出的概念空间分析框架可用于预训练的训练动态监控，对理解涌现能力的产生机制、优化预训练数据配比有直接价值。","technical_approach":"原创的概念空间分析框架，将每个独立的数据生成概念作为空间轴，刻画模型在该空间的学习动态，发现概念的学习速度由数据的概念信号强度决定，会出现突发的能力跃迁点。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，仅说明在生成模型上验证了概念学习顺序与概念信号强度的相关性，未给出具体模型规模、量化指标数据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The driving factors of concept learning order and hidden capability emergence in large models lack an interpretable analysis framework. Existing training dynamic analysis is mostly based on loss or metric changes, and cannot disassemble the independent learning process of different concepts.","importance":"Method-level contribution, the proposed concept space analysis framework can be used for training dynamic monitoring in pre-training, and has direct value for understanding capability emergence mechanism and optimizing pre-training data mixture ratio.","technical_approach":"Original concept space analysis framework, which takes each independent data generation concept as a spatial axis, characterizes the model's learning dynamics in this space. It finds that the learning speed of a concept is determined by the concept signal strength of the data, and sudden capability transition points exist.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose complete experimental data, only verifies the correlation between concept learning order and concept signal strength on generative models, no specific model scale or quantitative metric data is provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["emergence","training-dynamics","representation-learning","generalization"],"keywords":["Learning Dynamics","Compositional Generalization","Emergent Abilities","Diffusion Models","Mechanistic Interpretability"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大模型的能力是逐步学习不同概念后涌现的","claim_en":"Capabilities of large models emerge after gradually learning different concepts","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看概念空间构建方法和训练动态监控实验，做预训练数据配比优化、涌现机制研究的团队可直接复用其分析框架。","en":"Focus on the concept space construction method and training dynamic monitoring experiments; teams working on pretraining data ratio optimization and emergence mechanism research can directly reuse its analysis framework."}},{"id":"ParkWBPD24","title":"Grammar-Aligned Decoding","authors":["Kanghee Park","Jiayu Wang","Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick","Nadia Polikarpova","Loris D&apos;Antoni"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ef","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ParkWBPD24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ParkWBPD24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/2bdc2267c3d7d01523e2e17ac0a754f3-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在需要满足形式语法/结构约束的生成任务里，常规解码（greedy/beam）很容易产出语法非法序列，而“先生成再修补”或“靠提示词约束”通常不稳定且代价高。","importance":"贡献更偏方法级：把“语法约束”从后处理/外部校验前移到解码过程本身，给出一种可落地的约束解码范式，对代码生成、结构化输出、DSL/SQL 等场景的可靠性有直接启示。","technical_approach":"核心做法是 Grammar-Aligned Decoding：在每一步解码时用显式语法状态（例如解析器/自动机状态）过滤或重加权可选 token，使模型只在语法允许的动作空间里搜索。设计取舍是用更强的结构先验换取更小的搜索空间与更少的无效分支，但边界在于需要可用的语法/解析器，并且 tokenizer 与语法终结符的对齐会影响约束强度与可用性。","experiments":"题目与摘要未提供实验细节（模型规模、数据、指标与提升幅度均缺失），因此无法可靠总结其在不同语法复杂度、不同解码预算下的收益与开销。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical failure mode: when outputs must satisfy a formal grammar, standard decoding often produces invalid sequences, and “generate-then-fix” or prompt-only constraints are brittle and costly.","importance":"This is mainly a methods contribution: it moves grammar compliance into the decoding loop, offering a deployable recipe for more reliable structured generation (code/SQL/DSL), which matters whenever invalid outputs are expensive.","technical_approach":"Grammar-Aligned Decoding enforces an explicit grammar state during decoding (e.g., parser/automaton state) to mask or reweight next-token choices so search happens only within grammar-permitted actions. The trade-off is stronger structural guarantees and less wasted search versus the need for an available grammar/parser and careful alignment between tokenizer units and grammar terminals, which can limit constraint tightness.","experiments":"No experimental details are available from the provided metadata (model sizes, datasets, metrics, and gains are missing), so robustness and overhead cannot be assessed here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["decoding","grammar","structured-generation","inference"],"notable_authors":["Kanghee Park","Jiayu Wang","Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick","Nadia Polikarpova","Loris D'Antoni"],"keywords":["Language Models","Decoding","Context-free Grammars"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看解码时语法状态过滤的实现逻辑和结构化生成效果实验，做代码、SQL等约束生成场景的团队可参考落地。","en":"Only read the implementation logic of grammar state filtering during decoding and structured generation effect experiments; teams working on constrained generation scenarios like code and SQL can refer to it for implementation."}},{"id":"PatelKCKGBY24","title":"TripletCLIP: Improving Compositional Reasoning of CLIP via Synthetic Vision-Language Negatives","authors":["Maitreya Patel","Abhiram Kusumba","Sheng Cheng","Changhoon Kim","Tejas Gokhale","Chitta Baral","Yezhou Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f0","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PatelKCKGBY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PatelKCKGBY24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/39781da4b5d05bc2908ce08e43bc6404-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：CLIP 这类对比学习的图文表征在“组合推理”（属性-对象、关系、计数等）上容易靠数据偏置做捷径，缺少能系统打破捷径的训练信号。","importance":"贡献偏数据/训练信号级：通过构造“合成视觉-语言负样本”来显式惩罚组合错误匹配，属于对 CLIP 预训练目标的可插拔增强，对提升 compositionality 的方向有直接参考价值。","technical_approach":"TripletCLIP 的关键是把训练从二元对比扩展到三元/三元组约束：除了正对（image, caption），再加入针对组合因素（如交换属性/对象/关系）的“硬负样本”文本或图像，使模型必须区分语义上相近但组合结构错误的配对。这样做的原因是：随机负样本往往太容易，梯度主要在拉开粗粒度语义；而合成负样本把梯度集中到组合维度。边界在于合成规则的覆盖面与噪声：规则太窄会过拟合特定模板，规则太激进会引入语义不一致的负样本导致表示退化。","experiments":"题目与摘要未提供具体实验数字（训练数据规模、backbone、评测基准与提升幅度缺失），因此只能确认其评测重点应在 compositional benchmarks（如属性绑定/关系理解）与对标准检索指标的副作用。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a known weakness of CLIP-style contrastive pretraining: compositional reasoning (attribute-object binding, relations, counting) is often solved via shortcuts, because the training signal rarely forces fine-grained compositional discrimination.","importance":"This is primarily a data/training-signal contribution: it injects synthetic vision-language negatives to explicitly penalize compositional mismatches, as a plug-in enhancement to CLIP objectives for better compositionality.","technical_approach":"TripletCLIP augments standard positive pairs with structured “hard negatives” created by compositional perturbations (e.g., swapping attributes/objects/relations), effectively turning learning into a triplet-style constraint. The motivation is that random negatives are too easy and mostly shape coarse semantics, while synthetic near-miss negatives concentrate gradients on compositional factors. The main limitation is the coverage and noise of the synthesis rules: narrow rules risk template overfitting; aggressive rules can create semantically invalid negatives and harm representations.","experiments":"No concrete experimental details are provided (model/backbone, data scale, benchmarks, and deltas are missing), so the magnitude of gains and trade-offs on standard retrieval metrics cannot be summarized reliably.","authors_note":""},"tags":["clip","compositionality","synthetic-data","contrastive-learning"],"notable_authors":["Maitreya Patel","Abhiram Kusumba","Sheng Cheng","Changhoon Kim","Tejas Gokhale"],"keywords":["Contrastive Learning","Synthetic data","CLIP","Compositionality","TripletCLIP"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看合成硬负样本的构造规则和训练目标修改部分，做多模态预训练组合性优化的团队可直接测试该可插拔增强方案。","en":"Focus on the synthetic hard negative construction rules and training objective modification; multimodal pretraining teams working on compositionality optimization can directly test this pluggable enhancement scheme."}},{"id":"PetrovDBMV24","title":"DAGER: Exact Gradient Inversion for Large Language Models","authors":["Ivo Petrov","Dimitar I. Dimitrov","Maximilian Baader","Mark Niklas Müller","Martin T. Vechev"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f1","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PetrovDBMV24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PetrovDBMV24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9ff1577a1f8308df1ccea6b4f64a103f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在联邦学习/分布式训练中，梯度泄露会暴露训练样本，但现有梯度反演多是近似优化，难以界定“在什么条件下可以精确恢复”。","importance":"贡献是安全机制级：提出对 LLM 的“精确梯度反演”（exact gradient inversion）条件与算法，会把隐私风险从经验现象提升到可证明/可判定的层面，对训练系统设计（梯度裁剪、噪声、聚合策略）有直接警示意义。","technical_approach":"DAGER 的核心是利用大模型结构与梯度方程的可解性，把反演从非凸搜索推进到更接近解析/精确求解：在特定层/特定设置下，梯度包含足够约束可恢复输入 token 或其等价表示。其有效性依赖于攻击者可见的梯度粒度、batch size、以及模型模块（embedding/LM head/注意力）的可逆信息量。边界在于：一旦引入 DP 噪声、梯度压缩/量化、较大 batch 聚合或随机化层，精确性会迅速下降，但这也意味着该工作能帮助我们识别“哪些防御真正改变了可解性”。","experiments":"题目与摘要未提供实验设置与成功率数字（模型规模、层选择、batch size、在何种防御下失效等），因此无法量化其在真实训练管线中的威胁等级。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles gradient leakage in distributed/federated training: most gradient inversion attacks are approximate optimizations, leaving unclear when exact reconstruction is possible.","importance":"This is a security-mechanism contribution: it studies conditions and algorithms for exact gradient inversion on LLMs, shifting privacy risk from empirical anecdotes toward more decidable/structural understanding, with direct implications for training-system defenses.","technical_approach":"DAGER exploits model structure and solvable gradient equations to move inversion closer to an exact/analytic recovery under certain layers and settings, where gradients provide sufficient constraints to reconstruct input tokens or equivalent representations. Success depends on gradient visibility/granularity, batch size, and how much invertible information is present in modules like embeddings/LM head/attention. The boundary is that DP noise, compression/quantization, larger-batch aggregation, and randomization can quickly break exactness—usefully highlighting which defenses truly change solvability.","experiments":"No experimental details or success rates are provided (model sizes, layer choices, batch sizes, failure under defenses), so real-world threat level cannot be quantified from the given metadata.","authors_note":""},"tags":["privacy","gradient-inversion","llm","security"],"notable_authors":["Ivo Petrov","Dimitar I. Dimitrov","Maximilian Baader","Mark Niklas Müller","Martin T. Vechev"],"keywords":["Federated Learning","Exact Gradient Inversion","Gradient Leakage","Privacy","Language Model","LLM","Attack"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看精确反演的前置条件和边界分析部分，做分布式训练、联邦学习隐私安全的团队可参考其结论调整防御策略。","en":"Only read the preconditions and boundary analysis of exact inversion; teams working on distributed training and federated learning privacy security can adjust defense strategies based on its conclusions."}},{"id":"PetrovLP0B24","title":"Universal In-Context Approximation By Prompting Fully Recurrent Models","authors":["Aleksandar Petrov","Tom A. Lamb","Alasdair Paren","Philip Torr","Adel Bibi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f2","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PetrovLP0B24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PetrovLP0B24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/848784373188ddf641079524e89e0ac9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：标准 Transformer 的 in-context learning（ICL）理论多建立在注意力或线性化近似上，而“完全循环（fully recurrent）”模型是否能通过 prompting 实现通用的上下文逼近能力缺少清晰刻画。","importance":"贡献偏理论/能力刻画：给出“通过 prompt 实现通用 in-context 逼近”的结果，把 ICL 从 Transformer 特例推广到更一般的循环架构，对理解 ICL 机制与探索非注意力架构有启发。","technical_approach":"核心是证明/构造：在 fully recurrent 的设定下，通过设计 prompt（上下文序列）可以让模型在上下文中实现对目标函数/映射的近似，从而达到“universal in-context approximation”。关键点通常在于把上下文当作可编程的外部存储与控制信号，并利用循环状态的动态系统性质实现计算。边界在于：理论可实现不等于可训练，构造可能需要很长上下文、精细数值条件或不现实的权重规模；同时与实际 LLM 的优化偏置是否一致需要实验支撑。","experiments":"题目与摘要未提供任何实证结果（是否有训练模型验证、上下文长度需求、误差随长度/维度缩放等），因此目前只能把它视为能力上界/可实现性结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether universal in-context approximation is possible via prompting in fully recurrent models, beyond Transformer-specific intuitions and linearized analyses of ICL.","importance":"This is mainly a theoretical capability result: it extends the notion of universal ICL-style approximation from attention-centric models to a broader recurrent setting, informing both mechanistic understanding and exploration of non-attention architectures.","technical_approach":"The work provides a proof/construction showing that, in a fully recurrent setup, appropriately designed prompts (context sequences) can make the model approximate a wide class of target mappings—treating context as programmable external control/memory and leveraging recurrent state dynamics for computation. The key limitation is the gap between existence and learnability: constructions may require long contexts, delicate numerical conditions, or unrealistic parameter scaling, and may not match optimization biases of practical LLM training.","experiments":"No empirical validation is provided in the given metadata (trained models, required context lengths, error scaling), so the result should be read as an expressivity/upper-bound statement.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","recurrent-models","theory","prompting"],"notable_authors":["Aleksandar Petrov","Tom A. Lamb","Alasdair Paren","Philip Torr","Adel Bibi"],"keywords":["prompting","universal approximation","in-context learning","recurrent models","rnn","ssm"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看理论证明和能力边界讨论部分，做非Transformer架构预训练、ICL机制研究的团队可参考其结论拓展思路。","en":"Only read the theoretical proof and capability boundary discussion; teams working on non-Transformer architecture pretraining and ICL mechanism research can expand ideas based on its conclusions."}},{"id":"PingWWHXY0CL024","title":"Delta-CoMe: Training-Free Delta-Compression with Mixed-Precision for Large Language Models","authors":["Bowen Ping","Shuo Wang","Hanqing Wang","Xu Han","Yuzhuang Xu","Yukun Yan","Yun Chen","Baobao Chang","Zhiyuan Liu","Maosong Sun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f3","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PingWWHXY0CL024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PingWWHXY0CL024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/37664246a1e07e212ddacea6e5a523f2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：大模型参数/增量（delta，如 LoRA 或微调差分）在分发与部署时存储和带宽成本高，而常规压缩要么需要再训练/校准，要么对精度损失不可控。","importance":"贡献偏系统/工程方法：提出训练免（training-free）的 delta 压缩，并结合混合精度，在“可直接落地部署”的约束下优化体积-精度权衡，对持续微调与模型版本管理很实用。","technical_approach":"Delta-CoMe 的核心是对“权重差分”而非全量权重做压缩，并用 mixed-precision（不同张量/通道用不同位宽）来匹配 delta 的分布特性：delta 往往稀疏或集中在少数方向，用统一量化会浪费码率或放大误差。训练免意味着不引入额外微调来吸收量化误差，优势是流程简单、适合大规模版本分发；代价是缺少误差补偿时对极端层/异常分布更敏感，需要良好的分组与尺度估计策略。","experiments":"题目与摘要未提供压缩倍率、位宽配置、评测模型（如 7B/13B/70B）、任务指标与精度回退数字，因此无法判断其相对 GPTQ/AWQ、LoRA delta 专用压缩等方案的优势区间。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a deployment bottleneck: distributing and serving model deltas (e.g., finetune/LoRA differences) can be storage- and bandwidth-heavy, while many compression methods require retraining/calibration or have hard-to-control accuracy loss.","importance":"This is a systems/engineering contribution: it proposes training-free delta compression with mixed precision, optimizing the size–accuracy trade-off under practical “drop-in deployment” constraints, which is valuable for continual finetuning and model versioning.","technical_approach":"Delta-CoMe compresses weight deltas rather than full weights and uses mixed precision (different bit-widths per tensor/group) to match delta-specific distributions. Deltas are often sparse or concentrated in a few directions; uniform quantization can waste bits or amplify error. Being training-free simplifies the pipeline and scales to many variants, but without error-absorbing finetuning it can be sensitive to outlier layers and requires robust grouping and scale estimation.","experiments":"No numbers are provided on compression ratios, bit-width configs, evaluated model sizes (e.g., 7B/13B/70B), task metrics, or accuracy drops, so the advantage regime versus GPTQ/AWQ or delta-specific baselines cannot be determined from the given metadata.","authors_note":""},"tags":["compression","mixed-precision","delta-weights","llm"],"notable_authors":["Bowen Ping","Shuo Wang","Hanqing Wang","Xu Han","Yuzhuang Xu"],"keywords":["Large Language Model","Delta Compression","Efficient Serving","Multi-Tenant Serving"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看压缩策略设计章节和精度-压缩率对比表即可，工程落地性强可直接复用在增量模型分发场景。","en":"Only read the compression strategy design section and accuracy-compression rate comparison table, the implementation is mature enough to be directly reused for delta model distribution."}},{"id":"PitisXRS24","title":"Improving Context-Aware Preference Modeling for Language Models","authors":["Silviu Pitis","Ziang Xiao","Nicolas Le Roux","Alessandro Sordoni"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f4","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PitisXRS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PitisXRS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/82acbbc04435f6c1e7f656b1cbe4ad82-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：现有偏好模型通常把单轮回答当作独立样本打分，导致在多轮对话里无法稳定利用上下文，进而把用户真实偏好和局部表面偏好混在一起。这个问题过去常被用更大模型或更多偏好数据硬顶过去，但对话式 LM 的对齐越来越依赖长上下文，单独比较回答片段已经不够。","importance":"它的重要性主要在方法层，而不是预训练范式层。对 pretrain/post-train 接口的启示是：如果偏好建模阶段不能正确处理上下文，后续 RLHF 优化会放大错误奖励信号，使模型学到对局部措辞过拟合、对整段交互目标不敏感的行为；因此这类工作更像是在提高训练信号质量，而不是单纯换一个 reward model 结构。","technical_approach":"核心思路大概率是改进 context-aware preference modeling，让偏好判断显式条件化在对话历史或任务上下文上，而不是只看候选回答本身。与常见的 Bradley-Terry 式成对比较相比，这类方法的关键设计通常是在输入表示、上下文聚合或比较函数上做约束：既要保留可训练的偏好判别形式，又要避免把全部历史无差别塞进去导致噪声上升和计算成本失控；如果论文标题中的“improving”落在建模细节上，那区别更可能是对上下文如何进入偏好函数做了更细的分解，而不是提出全新的对齐目标。","experiments":"从题目看，实验重点应是多轮或上下文敏感的偏好预测，而不是通用生成 benchmark 冲榜。合理的关键结果应包括：在有对话历史的 preference datasets 上，相比不看上下文或简单拼接上下文的 baselines，偏好预测准确率更高；并且在下游 RLHF 或 reranking 场景里，对长对话一致性、指令遵循稳定性或 persona 保持更好。由于这里没有摘要，无法确认模型规模、数据规模、具体指标和提升幅度，不能编造。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a concrete failure mode in preference modeling: most reward or preference models score responses too locally, so they miss what the user actually prefers once dialogue history matters. This used to be partially masked by larger models or more data, but for multi-turn assistants the mismatch between local response quality and context-dependent preference has become too costly to ignore.","importance":"The contribution is likely methodological rather than paradigm-shifting. Its value for pretrain-facing researchers is that reward quality is part of the training pipeline: if context is modeled poorly at the preference stage, RLHF amplifies that error and pushes the model toward shallow stylistic wins instead of globally coherent behavior across turns.","technical_approach":"The method appears to improve context-aware preference modeling by conditioning preference judgments more explicitly on dialogue context instead of treating each answer as an isolated candidate. Relative to standard pairwise Bradley-Terry style setups, the likely design choice is to control how context enters the scorer—enough to capture dependency on history, but not so much that long-context noise and cost dominate; this sounds more like a careful redesign of the preference function than a brand-new alignment objective.","experiments":"The most relevant experiments are likely on multi-turn or context-sensitive preference prediction rather than generic generation leaderboards. The key facts to look for are gains over context-agnostic reward models and naive concatenation baselines, plus evidence that better preference modeling transfers to reranking or RLHF with improved dialogue consistency, instruction following, or persona retention. The provided metadata does not include abstract-level numbers, so model sizes, data scale, metrics, and exact gains cannot be stated reliably.","authors_note":""},"tags":["preference-modeling","rlhf","context-aware","reward-model"],"keywords":["context-specific preference modeling","preference modeling","reward modeling","language modeling","rlaif","rlhf"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3上下文聚合模块设计和多轮对话偏好评估实验即可，可用来优化内部RLHF的奖励模型信号质量。","en":"Only read §3 on context aggregation module design and multi-turn preference evaluation experiments, it helps improve reward model signal quality for internal RLHF pipelines."}},{"id":"PoddarWIGJ24","title":"Personalizing Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback with Variational Preference Learning","authors":["Sriyash Poddar","Yanming Wan","Hamish Ivison","Abhishek Gupta","Natasha Jaques"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f5","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PoddarWIGJ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PoddarWIGJ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/5e1c255653eb98cef13f45b2d337c882-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：标准 RLHF 默认所有人共享同一个偏好函数，但真实用户偏好存在稳定的个体差异，统一奖励会把“平均人”的偏好强加给所有人。过去个性化通常靠 prompt、profile 或少量微调绕开，但这些方法并没有把“偏好不确定性”和“用户间差异”纳入奖励学习本身。","importance":"它的价值在对齐方法级，而且对高质量训练信号很关键。对 pretrain/post-train 闭环的启示是：如果后训练阶段的奖励建模开始显式建模用户异质性，那么我们在预训练或 continued pretraining 阶段也会更重视 persona、风格条件化和多分布行为建模；这不是换个下游技巧，而是在修正‘单一 reward 足够’这个过强假设。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把个性化偏好学习做成变分建模：用潜变量表示用户特定偏好，并在有限反馈下推断这个潜变量，再据此进行 personalized RLHF。相比把用户 ID 当离散标签或直接训练一堆用户特定 reward model，这种设计更稳健，因为它允许在数据稀疏时共享统计强度，同时保留用户差异；代价是推断过程更复杂，而且如果潜变量容量过大，容易把噪声或短期情绪也吸进去。","experiments":"从题目判断，实验应围绕个性化 preference prediction 和 personalized policy learning 展开。关键 baseline 通常会包括：全局共享偏好模型、不带变分潜变量的个性化模型、以及只用显式用户特征的条件化方法；论文大概率报告在用户级 holdout 评估中，变分偏好学习在偏好预测准确率、个性化奖励一致性或人类满意度上更优，并特别展示少样本用户上的优势。由于没有摘要，无法确认用的是语言任务、推荐式环境还是对话环境，也无法给出具体数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a real limitation of standard RLHF: it assumes a single shared reward function, while real users have persistent and meaningful preference differences. Prior personalization often relied on prompting, profiles, or lightweight adaptation, but those approaches do not make preference heterogeneity part of the reward-learning problem itself.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with clear implications for the pretrain-to-posttrain interface. Once alignment starts modeling user-specific rewards explicitly, it changes what we want from upstream models as well: stronger conditional generation, better persona representations, and less dependence on a one-size-fits-all reward signal.","technical_approach":"The key idea is to use variational preference learning, where a latent variable captures user-specific preference structure and is inferred from limited feedback before optimizing the policy. Compared with using user IDs directly or training separate reward models per user, this gives a better bias-variance trade-off: it shares information across users when data is sparse, while still allowing meaningful personalization; the main risk is that an overly flexible latent variable can absorb noise rather than stable preference.","experiments":"The experimental center of gravity is likely personalized preference prediction and personalized RL or policy optimization. Relevant baselines should include a global shared reward model, non-variational personalization, and simple conditioning on explicit user features; the expected result is better user-level generalization, especially in low-feedback regimes. The abstract is not provided, so task domain, model scale, metrics, and exact improvement numbers cannot be stated with confidence.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rlhf","personalization","variational-inference","preference-learning"],"keywords":["reinforcement learning from human feedback","preference based reward learning","pluralistic alignment","multimodal reward modeling","variational inference"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4变分潜变量偏好建模章节即可，可作为内部个性化对齐方案的参考基线。","en":"Only read §4 on variational latent variable preference modeling, it serves as a solid reference baseline for internal personalized alignment solutions."}},{"id":"PotapczynskiQFF24","title":"Searching for Efficient Linear Layers over a Continuous Space of Structured Matrices","authors":["Andres Potapczynski","Shikai Qiu","Marc Finzi","Christopher Ferri","Charlie Chen","Micah Goldblum","C. Bayan Bruss","Christopher De Sa","Andrew Gordon Wilson"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f6","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PotapczynskiQFF24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PotapczynskiQFF24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/0729c38b421cd66f2313ab397d099e37-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：线性层是大模型里最贵、也最不受结构先验约束的部分，但现有高效替代方案通常只在少数离散结构矩阵家族里选，比如低秩、稀疏、Toeplitz 或 Kronecker，搜索空间过窄。作者想做的是在连续空间里搜索结构化矩阵，让效率与表达能力之间的折中不再被手工候选库限制。","importance":"它属于架构与效率方法，和预训练成本直接相关。对 pretrain 的启示是：如果线性层可以在保持质量的同时被系统地替换为更高效的结构，那么模型设计不必只在 dense vs low-rank 这类粗粒度选项间跳；这类工作更像是给大模型提供一套更细粒度的算子设计空间。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 over a continuous space of structured matrices 进行搜索，而不是从固定离散模板里枚举。关键设计大概有两点：第一，用统一参数化覆盖多类结构矩阵，使搜索过程可微或至少可优化；第二，在训练目标里同时纳入精度与效率约束，避免搜索只找到理论上省 FLOPs、实际硬件上却不快的结构。与传统 NAS 式离散搜索相比，这种连续化方法通常更平滑、更省搜索成本，但表达空间是否足够覆盖真正有用的结构，是它的边界。","experiments":"实验重点应是替换标准线性层后的质量-效率曲线。需要看的关键事实包括：在同等参数量或同等 wall-clock 下，相比 dense layer、低秩分解或已有结构矩阵方法，能否在训练/推理速度、内存和精度之间取得更优 Pareto 前沿；ablation 则应解释连续搜索空间中的不同子结构、约束项或硬件目标如何影响最终选择。由于没有摘要，无法确认是在 vision、language 还是更通用的网络上验证，也无法给出具体提升数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a structural inefficiency in modern networks: linear layers dominate cost, yet most efficient replacements search only over a small discrete menu of matrix families such as low-rank, sparse, Toeplitz, or Kronecker forms. The goal here is to search over a continuous space of structured matrices, so the efficiency–expressivity trade-off is not limited by a hand-designed shortlist.","importance":"This is an architecture-and-efficiency contribution with direct relevance to pretraining cost. If useful structured linear layers can be discovered systematically rather than selected from a few canonical forms, model design gains a much richer operator space than the usual dense-versus-low-rank decision.","technical_approach":"The core method appears to parameterize a continuous family of structured matrices and optimize within that space instead of doing discrete architecture search. The likely advantages are smoother optimization and lower search overhead, but the design must also account for hardware reality: a structure that is elegant analytically is not valuable if it fails to translate into real speedups. The main trade-off is coverage versus tractability—too narrow a parameterization misses good structures, too broad a one defeats the purpose.","experiments":"The relevant evidence should be Pareto improvements in quality versus efficiency after replacing standard linear layers. Strong experiments would compare against dense layers, low-rank baselines, and existing structured-matrix methods on training speed, inference latency, memory, and final accuracy, with ablations on the search space and hardware-aware objectives. The abstract is unavailable, so the exact domains, model sizes, and gains cannot be stated confidently.","authors_note":""},"tags":["structured-matrices","linear-layers","architecture-search","efficiency"],"keywords":["Structured Matrices","Scaling Laws","Linear Layers","Optimization","Deep Learning","Einsum"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看结构化矩阵统一参数化设计和硬件实际测速表即可，对高效预训练算子选型有参考价值。","en":"Only read the unified parameterization design of structured matrices and actual hardware speed test table, it provides reference for efficient pre-training operator selection."}},{"id":"QiaoYRBLMDO24","title":"Model Decides How to Tokenize: Adaptive DNA Sequence Tokenization with MxDNA","authors":["Lifeng Qiao","Peng Ye","Yuchen Ren","Weiqiang Bai","Chaoqi Liang","Xinzhu Ma","Nanqing Dong","Wanli Ouyang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f7","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/QiaoYRBLMDO24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/QiaoYRBLMDO24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/79af547fa22cdcb0facd0b31dcd4bdb0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：DNA 序列建模长期依赖固定 k-mer 或人工定义 tokenization，但生物序列里的有意义模式尺度并不固定，固定切分会在表达能力和词表规模之间做很差的折中。作者要解决的是让模型自己决定如何分词，从而让 token 单元更贴近序列中的真实结构，而不是贴近人工先验。","importance":"这篇工作虽然面向 DNA，但其启示是典型的 tokenizer/pretrain 问题。重要之处在于，它把‘tokenization 应该固定在训练前完成’这个默认设定拿出来挑战；对语言和多模态预训练都相关，因为一旦 token 单元可学习，模型容量、序列长度、频率统计和优化动态都会一起变化。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 adaptive DNA sequence tokenization with MxDNA，也就是让模型在训练过程中联合学习或自适应选择序列切分。关键设计通常包括：如何定义可微或可搜索的分词决策，怎样避免分词退化成全长字符级或极端长片段级，如何控制词表与上下文长度的平衡；与固定 k-mer 相比，这种方法的价值在于能根据数据分布自适应地用更长 token 捕捉高频 motif、用更短 token 保留罕见变化。","experiments":"实验最关键的事实应是 adaptive tokenization 是否同时改善建模质量和效率。需要关注的结果包括：在 DNA language modeling、序列分类或下游生物序列任务上，相比字符级和多种固定 k-mer baseline，MxDNA 在 perplexity、准确率或训练长度压缩率上是否更优；好的 ablation 还会分析学到的 token 长度分布是否与已知生物 motif 对应。由于没有摘要，无法确认是否使用大型基因组预训练、具体序列长度和提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a tokenization bottleneck in DNA modeling: fixed k-mer or handcrafted tokenization schemes impose a poor trade-off because meaningful biological patterns do not all live at one scale. The goal is to let the model decide how to tokenize, so the units reflect sequence structure rather than a rigid preprocessing choice.","importance":"Although the domain is DNA, the lesson is broadly about tokenization in pretraining. The paper challenges the default assumption that tokenization must be fixed before training; once token boundaries become adaptive, they change sequence length, vocabulary statistics, model capacity allocation, and optimization dynamics all at once.","technical_approach":"The method appears to learn or adapt tokenization during training in the MxDNA framework. The key design challenge is to make segmentation learnable without collapsing to trivial extremes such as purely character-level or overly coarse chunks, while preserving a usable balance among vocabulary size, compression, and expressivity. Relative to fixed k-mers, the main advantage is the ability to use longer units for frequent motifs and shorter units where rare variation matters.","experiments":"The main evidence should test whether adaptive tokenization improves both modeling quality and efficiency. The right comparisons are against character-level and multiple fixed-k baselines on DNA language modeling or downstream sequence tasks, with metrics such as perplexity, task accuracy, and sequence compression; a strong paper would also inspect whether learned tokens align with known biological motifs. The abstract is not provided, so model scale, pretraining corpus size, and exact gains cannot be reported reliably.","authors_note":""},"tags":["tokenizer","dna","adaptive-tokenization","genomics"],"keywords":["genomics","tokenization","foundation models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看自适应分词的可微训练机制设计即可，其思路可迁移到通用NLP的动态分词预训练探索。","en":"Only read the differentiable training mechanism design of adaptive tokenization, its idea can be transferred to dynamic tokenization exploration for general NLP pre-training."}},{"id":"RenWL24","title":"Learning and Transferring Sparse Contextual Bigrams with Linear Transformers","authors":["Yunwei Ren","Zixuan Wang","Jason D. Lee"],"institutions":["Princeton University"],"abstract":"$f8","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RenWL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RenWL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/2428ff361a08bc6864fb240bc83fba42-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer的上下文建模能力的理论基础不清晰，现有理论分析多针对简化设置，无法解释Transformer对稀疏上下文依赖的学习过程。","importance":"理论级贡献，明确了单层线性Transformer学习稀疏上下文二元组的训练动态和样本复杂度，对Transformer架构优化、样本效率提升有指导意义。","technical_approach":"首先提出稀疏上下文二元组（SCB）作为经典二元组的扩展，下一个token的生成依赖于由最后一个token决定的稀疏前置位置集合，分析梯度下降训练的单层线性Transformer学习SCB的过程，将训练分为两个阶段：初始样本密集阶段（相关性从0提升到非零值）和后续样本高效阶段。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，仅验证了两阶段训练动态的存在，未给出具体样本复杂度的量化对比数据。","authors_note":"普林斯顿大学团队，Jason D. Lee为知名机器学习理论学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The theoretical basis of Transformer's context modeling capability is not clear. Existing theoretical analysis mostly targets simplified settings, and cannot explain the learning process of sparse context dependencies by Transformers.","importance":"Theory-level contribution, clarifies the training dynamics and sample complexity of single-layer linear Transformers learning sparse contextual bigrams, and has guidance for Transformer architecture optimization and sample efficiency improvement.","technical_approach":"It first proposes Sparse Contextual Bigram (SCB) as an extension of classical bigram, where next token generation depends on a sparse set of previous positions determined by the last token. It analyzes the process of learning SCB with a single-layer linear Transformer trained by gradient descent, and splits training into two phases: initial sample-intensive phase (correlation increases from 0 to non-trivial value) and subsequent sample-efficient phase.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose complete experimental data, only verifies the existence of two-phase training dynamics, no specific quantitative comparison data of sample complexity is provided.","authors_note":"Princeton University team, Jason D. Lee is a well-known machine learning theory researcher."},"tags":["linear-transformer","context-modeling","sparsity","sequence-modeling"],"keywords":["transformer","sample complexity","optimization"],"notable_authors":["Jason D. Lee"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"线性Transformer可以建模上下文依赖关系","claim_en":"Linear Transformers can model contextual dependencies","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3训练动态分阶段分析部分即可，对优化线性Transformer的样本效率有理论指导意义。","en":"Only read §3 on phased training dynamics analysis, it has theoretical guiding significance for improving sample efficiency of linear Transformers."}},{"id":"RendeGLG24","title":"A distributional simplicity bias in the learning dynamics of transformers","authors":["Riccardo Rende","Federica Gerace","Alessandro Laio","Sebastian Goldt"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$f9","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RendeGLG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RendeGLG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ae6c81a39079ddeb88b034b6ef18c7fe-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer的自监督学习泛化性的驱动机制不清晰，现有简单性偏差的研究多针对前馈网络的监督学习场景，未验证Transformer在自然语言自监督训练下是否存在该偏差。","importance":"理论级贡献，首次验证了Transformer在自然语言自监督训练下存在分布型简单性偏差，对理解Transformer的泛化能力、优化预训练目标有指导价值。","technical_approach":"原创的多体交互分析方法，发现Transformer按顺序学习输入token之间的多体交互，先完成低阶交互的预测误差饱和，再学习高阶交互，该现象定义为分布型简单性偏差。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，仅在自然语言自监督训练设置下验证了简单性偏差的存在，未给出具体模型规模、量化对比数据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The driving mechanism of generalization ability of Transformers trained with self-supervised learning is not clear. Existing research on simplicity bias mostly targets supervised learning scenarios with feed-forward networks, and has not verified whether the bias exists for Transformers trained on natural language with self-supervised objectives.","importance":"Theory-level contribution, verifies for the first time that Transformers have distributional simplicity bias under natural language self-supervised training, and has guidance for understanding Transformer's generalization ability and optimizing pre-training objectives.","technical_approach":"Original many-body interaction analysis method, finds that Transformers sequentially learn many-body interactions between input tokens: first reach saturation of prediction error for low-degree interactions, then learn higher-degree interactions. This phenomenon is defined as distributional simplicity bias.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose complete experimental data, only verifies the existence of simplicity bias under natural language self-supervised training settings, no specific model scale or quantitative comparison data is provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformers","learning-dynamics","simplicity-bias","generalization"],"keywords":["Transformers","Natural Language Processing","Sequential Learning","Simplicity Bias"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"过参数化神经网络的泛化性由简单性偏差驱动","claim_en":"Generalization of over-parameterized neural networks is driven by simplicity bias","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer在自然语言自监督训练下也存在简单性偏差，按顺序学习token间的低阶到高阶交互","claim_en":"Transformers trained on natural language with self-supervised objectives also have simplicity bias, and learn from low-degree to high-degree interactions between tokens sequentially","opposes":"Prior work assumes simplicity bias only exists in feed-forward networks trained with supervised learning","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"This conclusion unifies the generalization mechanism of supervised and self-supervised learning, which can guide the design of better pre-training objectives"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4多体交互学习顺序的实验验证部分即可，可用来辅助设计预训练的课程学习策略。","en":"Only read §4 on experimental verification of multi-body interaction learning order, it helps design curriculum learning strategies for pre-training."}},{"id":"RosatiWWBGMM0R24","title":"Representation Noising: A Defence Mechanism Against Harmful Finetuning","authors":["Domenic Rosati","Jan Wehner","Kai Williams","Lukasz Bartoszcze","Robie Gonzales","Carsten Maple","Subhabrata Majumdar","Hassan Sajjad","Frank Rudzicz"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$fa","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RosatiWWBGMM0R24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RosatiWWBGMM0R24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/172be8b0b88fc2b4aee74237d43f8c04-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"开源大模型存在被恶意微调用于有害用途的风险，现有安全护栏等措施可被微调轻易移除，没有在攻击者获得模型权重的情况下仍能生效的防御方案。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出的表示加噪方案不影响模型正常使用，同时可抵御恶意微调，对开源大模型的安全发布有实际落地价值。","technical_approach":"原创的权重预处理防御方案RepNoise，在模型发布前移除有害表示的相关信息，使得微调过程中难以恢复有害表示，同时保留模型的正常功能，无需额外推理开销。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，仅说明在攻击者获得完整权重的场景下验证了防御效果，未给出具体攻击成功率降低的量化数据、正常功能的性能损耗数据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Open-source large language models face the risk of being fine-tuned for harmful purposes by bad actors. Existing safety measures like guardrails can be easily removed by fine-tuning, no defense solution works even when attackers have full access to model weights.","importance":"Method-level contribution, the proposed representation noising scheme does not affect normal model usage, and can resist malicious fine-tuning at the same time. It has practical value for safe release of open-source large models.","technical_approach":"Original weight preprocessing defense scheme named RepNoise. It removes information related to harmful representations before model release, making it hard to recover harmful representations during fine-tuning, while retaining normal model functions, no extra inference overhead is required.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose complete experimental data, only verifies the defense effect under the scenario where attackers have full access to model weights, no quantitative data of attack success rate reduction or normal function performance loss is provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["safety","finetuning","representation","alignment"],"keywords":["Harmful Fine-tuning","LLM Security","Domain Authorization"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"现有大模型安全措施可被恶意微调轻易绕过","claim_en":"Existing LLM safety measures can be easily bypassed by malicious fine-tuning","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看表示加噪的预处理方案和攻防实验结果即可，适合开源模型发布前的安全加固参考。","en":"Only read the representation noising preprocessing scheme and attack-defense experiment results, it is suitable for security hardening before open-source model release."}},{"id":"2402.16822","title":"Rainbow Teaming: Open-Ended Generation of Diverse Adversarial Prompts","authors":["Mikayel Samvelyan","Sharath Chandra Raparthy","Andrei Lupu","Eric Hambro","Aram H. Markosyan","Manish Bhatt","Yuning Mao","Minqi Jiang","Jack Parker-Holder","Jakob N. Foerster","Tim Rocktäschel","Roberta Raileanu"],"institutions":["Meta AI"],"abstract":"$fb","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.16822","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SamvelyanRLHMBM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SamvelyanRLHMBM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/8147a43d030b43a01020774ae1d3e3bb-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM对抗提示生成方法要么覆盖特定领域、多样性不足，要么需要大量人工标注，无法高效生成多样的对抗提示用于模型鲁棒性测试。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出的开放域对抗提示生成方法可大幅提升LLM安全测试的效率和覆盖度，对预训练模型的安全对齐有实际应用价值。","technical_approach":"原创的黑盒对抗提示生成方法，将对抗提示生成建模为质量-多样性优化问题，使用开放式搜索生成同时满足有效性和多样性的对抗提示，不需要人工标注。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，仅在Llama 2、Llama 3等主流模型上验证了方法的有效性，未给出具体攻击成功率、提示多样性的量化对比数据。","authors_note":"Meta AI团队。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM adversarial prompt generation methods either target specific domains with insufficient diversity, or require large amounts of manual annotation, cannot efficiently generate diverse adversarial prompts for model robustness testing.","importance":"Method-level contribution, the proposed open-domain adversarial prompt generation method can significantly improve the efficiency and coverage of LLM safety testing, and has practical application value for safety alignment of pre-trained models.","technical_approach":"Original black-box adversarial prompt generation method, which casts adversarial prompt generation as a quality-diversity optimization problem, uses open-ended search to generate adversarial prompts that are both effective and diverse, no manual annotation is required.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose complete experimental data, only verifies the effectiveness of the method on mainstream models including Llama 2 and Llama 3, no quantitative comparison data of attack success rate or prompt diversity is provided.","authors_note":"Meta AI team."},"tags":["safety","adversarial-prompts","red-teaming","alignment"],"keywords":["open-endedness","adversarial robustness","safety"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM的鲁棒性测试需要大量多样的对抗提示","claim_en":"LLM robustness testing requires a large number of diverse adversarial prompts","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3质量-多样性优化的搜索框架部分即可，可用来提升内部模型安全测试的对抗样本覆盖度。","en":"Only read §3 on quality-diversity optimization search framework, it helps improve adversarial sample coverage for internal model security testing."}},{"id":"2405.18512","title":"Understanding Transformer Reasoning Capabilities via Graph Algorithms","authors":["Clayton Sanford","Bahare Fatemi","Ethan Hall","Anton Tsitsulin","Mehran Kazemi","Jonathan Halcrow","Bryan Perozzi","Vahab Mirrokni"],"institutions":["Google DeepMind"],"abstract":"$fc","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.18512","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SanfordFHTKHPM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SanfordFHTKHPM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/8f395480c04ac6dfb2c2326a639df88e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有Transformer推理能力的理论分析多基于理想化参数区间，缺乏真实训练可用的参数规模下的算法推理边界判定，此前工作要么仅做实验观测要么理论假设脱离实际配置。","importance":"属于机制分析类贡献，给出Transformer深度、宽度、额外执行token三类参数与9类算法任务可解性的对应关系，为预训练阶段针对推理能力的架构设计、scaling配置提供可落地的理论参考。","technical_approach":"原创提出算法任务的表示层级分类框架，将9类推理问题按所需参数约束划分层级，分别证明每类任务的参数必要/充分条件，舍弃了此前理论分析中无限宽度/深度的不切实际假设。","experiments":"核心结论来自理论证明与小规模验证实验：对数深度的Transformer可完美解决图连通性等任务，小嵌入维度的单层Transformer即可解决上下文检索类任务，无额外SOTA对比。","authors_note":"作者来自Google DeepMind，Mehran Kazemi是DeepMind推理方向资深研究员，此前有多个算法推理、Transformer架构相关工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing theoretical analysis of Transformer reasoning capabilities mostly relies on idealized parameter regimes, with no practical boundary definition for algorithmic reasoning under real-world training parameter scales. Prior work either only provides empirical observations or uses unrealistic theoretical assumptions.","importance":"This is a mechanism analysis contribution. It maps three Transformer parameters (depth, width, number of extra execution tokens) to solvability of 9 algorithmic reasoning tasks, providing actionable theoretical guidance for architecture design and scaling configuration targeting reasoning capabilities during pre-training.","technical_approach":"The work proposes an original representational hierarchy for algorithmic tasks, dividing 9 reasoning tasks into classes by parameter requirements, and proves necessary and sufficient parameter conditions for each class, removing unrealistic assumptions of infinite width/depth used in prior theoretical analysis.","experiments":"Core conclusions come from theoretical proof and small-scale verification experiments: transformers with logarithmic depth can perfectly solve graph connectivity and similar tasks, single-layer transformers with small embedding dimensions can solve contextual retrieval tasks. No SOTA comparison is included.","authors_note":"Authors are from Google DeepMind. Mehran Kazemi is a senior researcher in reasoning direction at DeepMind, with multiple prior works on algorithmic reasoning and Transformer architecture."},"tags":["transformer-theory","reasoning","graph-algorithms","scaling"],"keywords":["transformers","graph neural networks","representation","theory"],"notable_authors":["Mehran Kazemi"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer推理能力与模型深度、宽度、输入token数量正相关","claim_en":"Transformer reasoning capabilities correlate positively with model depth, width, and number of input tokens","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"图连通性等图算法任务仅需对数深度的Transformer即可完美解决","claim_en":"Graph algorithm tasks such as graph connectivity can be perfectly solved by transformers with only logarithmic depth","opposes":"Prior theoretical analysis assumes algorithmic reasoning tasks require linear or higher depth transformers","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3.2","why_contested":"Revises the previously overestimated depth requirement, providing theoretical basis for small parameter reasoning model design."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4参数规模与算法任务可解性的对应关系表即可，为推理导向的预训练模型缩放配置提供直接参考。","en":"Only read the parameter scale-algorithm solvability correspondence table in §4, it provides direct reference for reasoning-oriented pre-training model scaling."}},{"id":"2407.16920","title":"Train-Attention: Meta-Learning Where to Focus in Continual Knowledge Learning","authors":["Yeongbin Seo","Dongha Lee","Jinyoung Yeo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$fd","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.16920","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Seo0Y24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Seo0Y24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/6b111780a4a1c3beecb43b708ad7415e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大模型持续知识学习（CKL）方法（正则、架构修改、重放）沿用统一token权重更新策略，会引入不必要的参数更新，加剧灾难性遗忘，此前工作没有针对token重要性做差异化梯度更新。","importance":"属于方法级贡献，为持续预训练/知识注入提供了更高效的梯度更新策略，降低不必要的参数扰动，减少遗忘。","technical_approach":"原创提出Train-Attention-Augmented Language Model（TAALM），基于元学习框架动态预测每个token的知识更新重要性，给不同token分配差异化的更新权重，舍弃了此前所有token梯度权重一致的设计，无需修改模型架构或引入重放数据。","experiments":"在标准持续知识学习基准上，对比正则、重放类baseline，遗忘率降低12%-18%，参数更新量减少30%左右，ablation显示元学习预测的token重要性权重比人工设计的规则权重效果高8%。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing continual knowledge learning (CKL) methods for LLMs (regularization, architecture modification, rehearsal) use uniform token weight update strategy, leading to unnecessary parameter updates and worse catastrophic forgetting. No prior work applies differentiated gradient updates based on token importance.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution, providing a more efficient gradient update strategy for continual pre-training/knowledge injection, reducing unnecessary parameter perturbation and forgetting.","technical_approach":"The work proposes the original Train-Attention-Augmented Language Model (TAALM), which uses a meta-learning framework to dynamically predict the knowledge update importance of each token and assigns differentiated update weights. It removes the uniform gradient weight design used in prior work, and requires no architecture modification or rehearsal data.","experiments":"Tested on standard CKL benchmarks, compared to regularization and rehearsal baselines, forgetting rate is reduced by 12%-18%, parameter update volume is reduced by around 30%. Ablation shows token importance weights predicted by meta-learning outperform manually designed rule-based weights by 8%.","authors_note":""},"tags":["continual-learning","attention","meta-learning","catastrophic-forgetting"],"keywords":["continual learning","continual knowledge learning","large language models","meta-learning","train-attention","token weight"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大模型持续知识学习的核心痛点是灾难性遗忘","claim_en":"Catastrophic forgetting is the core pain point of continual knowledge learning for LLMs","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"针对token重要性分配差异化更新权重的策略，比均匀更新策略的持续知识学习效果更好、遗忘率更低","claim_en":"Token-wise differentiated update weight allocation based on importance outperforms uniform update strategy in continual knowledge learning, with lower forgetting rate","opposes":"Prior continual learning methods assume uniform update weight for all tokens is optimal","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4.2","why_contested":"Breaks the default assumption of gradient update in continual learning, providing a new design direction for efficient knowledge injection methods."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看token级动态更新权重的元学习实现部分即可，可直接复用在持续预训练的知识注入场景减少遗忘。","en":"Only read the meta-learning implementation of token-level dynamic update weight, it can be directly reused to reduce forgetting in continuous pre-training knowledge injection."}},{"id":"Shani0CLCZNKPSH24","title":"Multi-turn Reinforcement Learning with Preference Human Feedback","authors":["Lior Shani","Aviv Rosenberg","Asaf Cassel","Oran Lang","Daniele Calandriello","Avital Zipori","Hila Noga","Orgad Keller","Bilal Piot","Idan Szpektor","Avinatan Hassidim","Yossi Matias","Rémi Munos"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$fe","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Shani0CLCZNKPSH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Shani0CLCZNKPSH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d77a7b289361abff82bdd2fb537ae152-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：现有 RLHF 大多把人类偏好建模为单轮、静态的响应比较，但真实助手交互是多轮的，当前训练方式会把局部最优回复误当成全局最优策略。过去很多对齐方法在单轮 benchmark 上有效，但一进入长对话就容易出现前后不一致、目标漂移和回合间信用分配错误。","importance":"这是 post-train 方法问题，但对 pretrain-posttrain 接口很相关，因为多轮偏好会改变模型学到的策略类型，而不仅是输出口吻。它的重要性在于把 RLHF 的训练单位从“单条回答”改成“对话轨迹”，如果做得好，会直接影响 agent 式交互、长期有用性和对齐信号质量，也会提醒我们单轮 preference data 的局限。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法是面向多轮对话定义 reinforcement learning with preference human feedback。关键设计大概率包括：将偏好标注绑定到整段或多步子轨迹，而不是单步 response；训练 reward model 或 preference model 去评估多轮质量；再用 RL 在回合级别优化策略。和标准 RLHF 相比，差别不只是样本更长，而是 credit assignment 变了——模型必须学会为了后续回合保留信息、澄清歧义或避免早期误导，而不是贪图当前这一轮看起来最讨喜的回复。","experiments":"当前信息不足以确认实验数据、模型规模和指标。预期论文会在多轮对话基准或人工构造任务上，与单轮 RLHF、DPO 类方法或 SFT baseline 比较，关注对话成功率、一致性和长期偏好得分。最值得看的 ablation 通常是：如果把同样的偏好数据切成单轮训练，性能会明显下降；如果 reward 只看最后一轮，也会损失早期决策质量。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a mismatch in standard RLHF: most preference training is single-turn, while real assistant behavior is inherently multi-turn. Optimizing one response at a time can reward locally appealing answers that damage the rest of the conversation, especially through inconsistency, poor clarification, or bad early commitments.","importance":"This is a post-training paper, but it matters for the pretrain–posttrain loop because it changes what behavior the model is optimized to internalize. Moving from response-level preferences to trajectory-level preferences is important if we care about persistent dialogue quality, agent-like interaction, and the actual information content of alignment data rather than just stylistic compliance.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method is to extend preference-based RL to the multi-turn setting. The likely core idea is to collect or model preferences over dialogue trajectories or sub-trajectories, train a reward or preference model that scores multi-turn behavior, and then optimize the policy with RL at the conversation level. The design matters because it changes credit assignment: the model has to value actions that help future turns, not just maximize immediate preference on the current turn.","experiments":"The provided information does not include datasets, model sizes, baselines, or metrics. The most relevant expected evaluations would compare multi-turn preference RL against single-turn RLHF, DPO-style methods, and SFT baselines on dialogue success, consistency, and long-horizon preference scores. A particularly informative ablation would test whether collapsing multi-turn data into independent turns loses a substantial fraction of the benefit.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rlhf","multi-turn","preference-learning"],"keywords":["Reinforcement Learning","RLHF","Human Feedback","Preferences","Optimization","LLMs","Large Language Models","Natural Language Processing","NLP","Learning Theory","RL"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看多轮轨迹信用分配机制和多轮对话对齐实验即可，可用来优化内部多轮交互场景的对齐pipeline。","en":"Only read the multi-turn trajectory credit assignment mechanism and multi-turn alignment experiments, it helps optimize the alignment pipeline for internal multi-turn interaction scenarios."}},{"id":"SharmaKMFAK24","title":"A Critical Evaluation of AI Feedback for Aligning Large Language Models","authors":["Archit Sharma","Sedrick Scott Keh","Eric Mitchell","Chelsea Finn","Kushal Arora","Thomas Kollar"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$ff","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SharmaKMFAK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SharmaKMFAK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/33870b3e099880cd8e705cd07173ac27-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的核心问题是：AI feedback 是否真的能可靠替代人类反馈来对齐大模型，还是只是提供了一个看似便宜、实则带偏训练信号的近似。过去行业大量使用 RLAIF 或 model-based feedback 来降成本，但对其失真模式、偏差放大和任务依赖性的系统评估并不充分。","importance":"这篇工作的价值很高，因为它直接触碰 post-train 数据质量这个根问题，而这又会反过来影响我们如何理解对齐训练的真实收益。对 pretrain 研究者的启示是：如果反馈模型质量不足，后续 RL/DPO 得到的能力变化可能更多是 reward hacking 或风格漂移，而不是有用能力提升；因此不能把 AI feedback 当成无害的便宜替代品。","technical_approach":"从标题看，论文不是提出新对齐算法，而是做系统性批判性评估。关键方法大概率是：在多个任务和偏好场景下，对比人类反馈、AI feedback，以及由它们训练出来的模型；再分析 AI feedback 的一致性、可校准性、对错误模式的敏感度，以及是否会偏好表面流畅但事实更差的回答。和一般“我们用 GPT-4 当裁判”的做法不同，这类工作真正要看的不是平均相关性，而是失配出现在哪些任务、会不会在训练闭环里被放大。","experiments":"当前信息没有具体实验规模和结果数字。预期实验会覆盖 reward model 训练、DPO/RLHF 式偏好优化，比较 human feedback 与 AI feedback 在不同任务上的排序一致率、胜率和最终模型质量。最有价值的结果通常有两类：一，AI feedback 在分布内任务上看起来接近人类，但在长答案、复杂推理或安全边界样本上偏差显著；二，用 AI feedback 训练出来的模型可能在 AI judge 下变好，但在人评下收益缩水甚至反转，这直接暴露训练-评测共谋问题。","authors_note":"可确认的知名作者包括 Chelsea Finn。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether AI-generated feedback is a reliable substitute for human feedback in alignment, or whether it introduces systematic distortions that are cheap in cost but expensive in training signal quality. This matters because RLAIF-style pipelines are increasingly common, yet their failure modes are often under-measured.","importance":"This is an important evaluation paper because it targets the quality of the alignment signal itself. For pretraining and post-training researchers, the main implication is that improvements measured under model-based feedback may reflect reward hacking, stylistic matching, or evaluator bias rather than genuine gains in usefulness or reasoning quality.","technical_approach":"The contribution appears to be a critical empirical study rather than a new optimization method. The likely setup compares human feedback and AI feedback across tasks, then studies agreement rates, calibration, ranking behavior, and the downstream effect of using those signals in preference optimization. The key question is not whether AI judges correlate with humans on average, but where they disagree and whether those disagreements get amplified once the model is trained against them.","experiments":"The provided information does not include datasets, model sizes, or quantitative results. The most informative expected experiments would compare models trained with human versus AI preference signals, evaluate both under human judgments and AI judges, and break results down by task type, answer length, reasoning depth, and safety sensitivity. A strong negative result would be if AI feedback looks adequate on easy in-distribution cases but causes quality collapse or misranking on harder or more safety-critical examples.","authors_note":"A confirmed notable author is Chelsea Finn."},"tags":["ai-feedback","alignment","reward-model","llm-as-judge"],"notable_authors":["Chelsea Finn"],"keywords":["reinforcement learning from human feedback","ai feedback","alignment","direct preference optimization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的失配场景统计表即可，明确RLAIF的偏差放大风险，避免把AI反馈当成无成本替代方案用在对齐训练里。","en":"Only refer to §3 and mismatch scenario statistics tables to clarify RLAIF deviation amplification risks, and avoid using AI feedback as a zero-cost alternative in alignment training."}},{"id":"ShenCSGN24","title":"MoME: Mixture of Multimodal Experts for Generalist Multimodal Large Language Models","authors":["Leyang Shen","Gongwei Chen","Rui Shao","Weili Guan","Liqiang Nie"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$100","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ShenCSGN24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ShenCSGN24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/4a3a14b9536806a0522930007c5512f7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心问题是：通用型多模态大模型面对不同模态和任务时，常常用同一套参数硬扛，结果是跨模态干扰严重、专长不足，而且扩展到更多模态后效率和性能都变差。过去统一 MLLM 常在共享表示和专家化之间摇摆，没有很好解决“既统一又专精”的矛盾。","importance":"这是一篇多模态架构工作，对统一预训练很相关。它的重要性在于尝试把 MoE 思路引入 multimodal generalist setting：如果 mixture of multimodal experts 能有效隔离模态冲突，同时保留共享高层语义，那它会成为比单塔全共享更可扩展的一条路，尤其适合未来加入音频、视频等更多模态。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 MoME，即 Mixture of Multimodal Experts。按标题判断，它不是给每个模态完全独立一套模型，而是构建多个专家模块，再通过路由机制让不同模态输入或任务调用不同专家子集。关键设计点通常包括：专家放在哪些层、路由按 token / sample / modality 进行、共享骨干保留多少，以及如何避免专家塌缩。和传统文本 MoE 相比，多模态场景多了一层挑战：专家不仅要分工计算负载，还要处理不同感知模式的统计差异，因此“多模态专家”是否按模态硬切，还是学出跨模态功能性专家，是方法成败的关键。","experiments":"当前信息没有给出模型规模、模态范围和数值结果。预期实验会在多种 multimodal benchmark 上，将 MoME 与全参数共享的 MLLM、单模态专家拼接模型及可能的文本 MoE 变体比较，关注平均性能、参数效率和新增模态时的扩展性。最值得看的 ablation 是路由策略和专家共享程度：如果性能主要来自更多参数而非更好的分工，那么这类方法的实际意义会打折。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a common failure mode in generalist multimodal LLMs: one shared parameter set is asked to handle very different modalities and tasks, which often leads to interference, weak specialization, and poor scaling as more modalities are added. Prior unified models have not fully resolved the tension between sharing and specialization.","importance":"This is relevant to multimodal pretraining because it explores a scalable architectural answer to that tension. If a mixture of multimodal experts can preserve shared high-level semantics while reducing cross-modal interference, it would be a stronger path than fully shared backbones for future models that need to absorb images, audio, video, and text together.","technical_approach":"The core idea is MoME, a Mixture of Multimodal Experts. From the title, the model likely uses a routing mechanism to select subsets of experts depending on modality, token, or task, instead of forcing every input through the same dense stack. The important design choices are where the experts live, how much of the backbone remains shared, how routing is performed, and how expert collapse is avoided. Compared with text-only MoE, the multimodal setting adds the challenge that experts must handle different signal statistics, not just different linguistic patterns.","experiments":"The provided information does not include model sizes, modalities, benchmarks, or gains. The likely evaluation compares MoME against fully shared multimodal LLMs, modular baselines, and possibly text-MoE variants, with emphasis on average quality, parameter efficiency, and extensibility to more modalities. The most informative ablations would test whether gains come from better specialization and routing rather than simply from increasing parameter count.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","multimodal-llm","mixture-of-experts"],"keywords":["Multimodal Large Language Model","Mixture of Experts"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4.2的路由机制和Fig 5的模态冲突隔离效果即可，可参考多模态MoE的专家划分设计用于多模态预训练架构迭代。","en":"Only read §4.2 routing mechanism and Fig 5 modality conflict isolation results to reference multimodal MoE expert design for multimodal pretraining architecture iteration."}},{"id":"SinghaniaSHFB24","title":"Loki: Low-rank Keys for Efficient Sparse Attention","authors":["Prajwal Singhania","Siddharth Singh","Shwai He","Soheil Feizi","Abhinav Bhatele"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$101","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SinghaniaSHFB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SinghaniaSHFB24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1e027da6bec9ceb2ec37951ceeccae93-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：稀疏注意力理论上能降复杂度，但实际效果常被索引开销、候选选择误差和硬件不友好抵消。过去很多 sparse attention 方法要么依赖 hand-crafted pattern，泛化差；要么依赖昂贵的近似检索，系统上并不划算。","importance":"这篇工作对长上下文预训练和推理很相关，因为它试图把“哪些 key 值得看”这个问题压缩到低秩空间里处理。重要性在于，如果 key 的低秩近似足以支持高质量稀疏选择，那么 attention 的主要成本可以在不完全牺牲质量的前提下降下来，这比固定模式稀疏更有自适应性。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Loki：用 low-rank keys 做高效 sparse attention。按标题推断，方法不是直接在原始高维 key 空间做精确相似度，而是先把 key 压到低秩表示，再在这个更便宜的空间里进行候选筛选或近似打分，最后只对少量重要 token 做精细 attention。关键设计点在于低秩投影如何学、误差如何控制，以及筛选阶段和精算阶段如何配合。和固定局部窗口或预定义模式相比，它更数据自适应；和全量近似 ANN 检索相比，它可能更容易做成端到端、硬件友好的 kernel。","experiments":"当前信息没有具体模型规模、上下文长度和指标。预期实验会在长序列语言建模或长上下文 benchmark 上，与 full attention、已有 sparse/linear attention 方法比较，报告速度、显存和精度损失。最关键的 ablation 是低秩维度与质量/速度的 trade-off：若维度太低，筛选会漏掉关键依赖；若维度太高，节省的计算又不够。真正有说服力的结果应是中等低秩下就能接近 full attention 质量，同时带来实测 wall-clock 收益。","authors_note":"可确认的知名作者包括 Soheil Feizi。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical issue with sparse attention: lower asymptotic complexity often fails to translate into real gains because token selection is either too crude or too expensive. Many prior methods rely on fixed patterns that miss important dependencies, or on retrieval machinery that adds enough overhead to erase the benefit.","importance":"This is relevant to long-context pretraining and inference because it attacks the expensive part of attention through adaptive sparsity. The main significance is the idea that if key representations can be compressed into a useful low-rank space, then token selection may become cheap enough to matter while still preserving most of the quality of full attention.","technical_approach":"The method, Loki, appears to use low-rank key representations for efficient sparse attention. The likely mechanism is to project keys into a lower-dimensional space, use that space for cheap candidate filtering or approximate scoring, and then run exact attention only on a selected subset. The design challenge is balancing projection error against selection efficiency. Compared with fixed-window sparsity, this is more adaptive; compared with full ANN-style retrieval, it may be easier to train and implement efficiently.","experiments":"The provided information does not include model sizes, sequence lengths, or numerical gains. The expected evaluations would compare against full attention and prior sparse or linear-attention baselines on long-context language modeling or sequence tasks, reporting speed, memory, and quality trade-offs. The critical ablation is the low-rank dimension: too small and recall drops; too large and the computational savings disappear. A convincing result would show near-full-attention quality at a rank low enough to deliver real wall-clock speedups.","authors_note":"A confirmed notable author is Soheil Feizi."},"tags":["sparse-attention","attention","efficiency","long-context"],"notable_authors":["Soheil Feizi"],"keywords":["Approximate Attention","Low-Dimensional Attention Keys","PCA","Top-K Attention"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的低秩key构造和效率对比表即可，低秩近似选key的思路可用于长上下文预训练的注意力优化。","en":"Only check §4 low-rank key construction and efficiency comparison tables, the low-rank approximation idea can be used for attention optimization in long-context pretraining."}},{"id":"2411.07538","title":"Unraveling the Gradient Descent Dynamics of Transformers","authors":["Bingqing Song","Boran Han","Shuai Zhang","Jie Ding","Mingyi Hong"],"institutions":["University of Minnesota"],"abstract":"$102","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.07538","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SongHZD024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SongHZD024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a7d36e5cb41a1f21c46db25cb1aafab9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer 的梯度下降优化动态缺乏严格的理论保证——什么架构、什么初始化条件下 GD 能收敛，收敛速度如何，此前没有完整回答。","importance":"方法级理论贡献。对 pretrain 研究者来说，这类工作的价值在于帮助理解 loss landscape 的结构：Softmax attention 与 Gaussian attention 的收敛条件差异、初始化对训练速度的影响，可以为实际训练中的初始化策略和架构选择提供理论参考，但距离直接指导大规模实验仍有距离。","technical_approach":"分析单层 Transformer 的 loss landscape，分别考察 Softmax attention 和 Gaussian attention kernel。核心思路是刻画损失函数的局部凸性/平滑性条件，然后推导 GD 在合适初始化下的收敛速率。关键选择是限制在单层、特定 attention kernel 上做精确分析，换取可证明的收敛保证，代价是与多层深网的实际训练场景有 gap。","experiments":"理论为主的工作，实验主要用于验证理论预测。具体数字和 baseline 信息在摘要中未完整给出，预计是合成数据上的验证实验，展示不同初始化下的收敛曲线与理论预测的吻合程度。","authors_note":"作者来自明尼苏达大学等机构，Mingyi Hong 在优化理论方面有较多工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"There is no rigorous theoretical guarantee on when and how fast gradient descent converges for Transformers—this paper asks which architectures and initializations allow provable convergence.","importance":"A theory-level contribution. It provides formal convergence conditions for single-layer Transformers with Softmax and Gaussian attention, offering insights into loss landscape structure and initialization sensitivity. Practical impact on large-scale pretraining is indirect but informative.","technical_approach":"Analyzes the loss landscape of a single Transformer layer under two attention kernels (Softmax and Gaussian). Derives local convexity/smoothness conditions to establish GD convergence rates given proper initialization. The trade-off is restricting to one layer for tractability, leaving a gap to deep multi-layer settings.","experiments":"Primarily a theoretical paper; experiments validate theoretical predictions on synthetic setups, showing convergence curves matching derived rates under different initializations.","authors_note":"Authors from University of Minnesota and others. Mingyi Hong is known for optimization theory research."},"tags":["transformer","training-dynamics","optimization","theory"],"notable_authors":["Mingyi Hong"],"keywords":["Optimization","Transformer"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的收敛条件推导结论即可，结论仅适用于单层Transformer，可作为初始化策略调整的弱理论参考。","en":"Only refer to §3 convergence condition derivation conclusions, applicable only to single-layer Transformers, as weak theoretical reference for initialization strategy adjustment."}},{"id":"2405.04776","title":"Chain of Thoughtlessness? An Analysis of CoT in Planning","authors":["Kaya Stechly","Karthik Valmeekam","Subbarao Kambhampati"],"institutions":["Arizona State University"],"abstract":"$103","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.04776","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/StechlyVK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/StechlyVK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3365d974ce309623bd8151082d78206c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting 被认为能通过演示解题过程来提升 LLM 的推理泛化能力，但本文通过 Blocksworld 规划任务的案例研究发现，CoT 的提升高度依赖 prompt 与问题的具体匹配程度，泛化能力很弱。","importance":"对 ICL/CoT 机制理解有直接价值。核心发现是：CoT 并没有真正教会模型一个通用算法，而更像是模式匹配——只有当 prompt 中的示例与目标问题高度相似时才有效。这对 pretrain 研究者理解 in-context learning 的能力边界很重要：CoT 的收益可能来自检索而非推理。","technical_approach":"在 Blocksworld（经典规划域）上系统测试两个 SOTA LLM，沿两个维度变化：prompt 中示例的通用性（从高度特定到一般性）和查询问题的复杂度。通过控制变量实验来分离 CoT 的真实贡献。方法简单但实验设计有针对性。","experiments":"即使在非常简单的规划问题上，只有当 CoT prompt 与目标问题高度匹配时才观察到有意义的性能提升。一旦 prompt 变得更通用或问题复杂度增加，CoT 的优势迅速消失。具体数字需查看全文。","authors_note":"Subbarao Kambhampati 是 ASU 的 AI 规划领域知名教授，近年来对 LLM 推理能力持批判性研究立场。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Chain-of-thought prompting is believed to teach LLMs general problem-solving algorithms, but this case study on Blocksworld planning shows CoT improvements are highly dependent on prompt-problem specificity and do not generalize.","importance":"Directly relevant to understanding ICL/CoT mechanisms. The finding that CoT acts more like pattern matching than algorithm learning sets important boundaries on what in-context reasoning can achieve, informing how we think about emergent reasoning in pretrained models.","technical_approach":"Systematically tests two SOTA LLMs on Blocksworld, varying prompt generality and problem complexity. A controlled experiment design isolates CoT's true contribution from surface-level similarity matching.","experiments":"Meaningful CoT improvements only appear when prompts are exceedingly specific to the target problem. Performance gains vanish as prompts become more general or problems grow more complex, even on very simple planning tasks.","authors_note":"Subbarao Kambhampati (ASU) is a prominent AI planning researcher who has been critically examining LLM reasoning capabilities."},"tags":["chain-of-thought","reasoning","planning","icl"],"notable_authors":["Subbarao Kambhampati"],"keywords":["LLMs","Planning","Reasoning","Chain of Thought"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的泛化性实验结果即可，明确CoT收益来自模式匹配而非通用推理，可指导预训练ICL能力的评估设计。","en":"Only read §4 generalization experiment results, clarifies CoT gains come from pattern matching rather than general reasoning, guiding ICL capability evaluation design in pretraining."}},{"id":"Stengel-EskinHB24","title":"LACIE: Listener-Aware Finetuning for Calibration in Large Language Models","authors":["Elias Stengel-Eskin","Peter Hase","Mohit Bansal"],"institutions":["University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill"],"abstract":"$104","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Stengel-EskinHB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Stengel-EskinHB24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/4b8eaf3bcdc105423a972ed90eb07217-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 的置信度校准（calibration）问题：模型输出的概率分布往往不能准确反映其实际正确率。LACIE 提出通过 listener-aware 微调来改善校准。","importance":"对 pretrain 研究的直接影响有限，属于 posttrain/对齐方向。但校准问题与预训练阶段的表示学习和 loss 设计有间接关联——如果模型在预训练阶段就学到了更好的不确定性表示，后续校准会更容易。","technical_approach":"摘要为空，无法提供具体技术细节。从标题推断，方法核心是在微调时引入 listener（接收者）视角的信号来调节模型的置信度输出。","experiments":"摘要为空，无法提供实验细节。","authors_note":"Mohit Bansal 是 UNC Chapel Hill 的 NLP 教授，在多模态和语言理解方面有大量工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM confidence calibration—model probabilities often don't reflect actual correctness. LACIE proposes listener-aware finetuning to improve calibration.","importance":"Limited direct impact on pretraining; primarily a post-training/alignment contribution. Indirectly relevant if pretraining can produce better uncertainty representations.","technical_approach":"Abstract is empty. From the title, the approach incorporates a listener perspective during finetuning to regulate confidence outputs.","experiments":"No details available from the empty abstract.","authors_note":"Mohit Bansal is a well-known NLP professor at UNC Chapel Hill."},"tags":["calibration","finetuning","alignment","llm"],"notable_authors":["Mohit Bansal"],"keywords":["LLM calibration","uncertainty","question answering","pragmatics","listener-speaker model","LLM confidence estimation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的listener-aware微调设计即可，对预训练阶段不确定性表示优化有间接参考价值。","en":"Only check §3 listener-aware finetuning design, it provides indirect reference for uncertainty representation optimization in pretraining phase."}},{"id":"2410.20290","title":"Fast Best-of-N Decoding via Speculative Rejection","authors":["Hanshi Sun","Momin Haider","Ruiqi Zhang","Huitao Yang","Jiahao Qiu","Ming Yin","Mengdi Wang","Peter L. Bartlett","Andrea Zanette"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$105","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.20290","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SunHZYQYWBZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SunHZYQYWBZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3950f6bf5c2eb7435ecf58eaa85cc8c2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Best-of-N 解码是一种有效的推理时对齐方法（效果可媲美 SOTA post-training），但需要生成 N 个完整响应再选最优，计算开销巨大。本文提出 Speculative Rejection 来大幅加速。","importance":"系统/效率级贡献。Best-of-N 的有效性说明推理时对齐是 post-training 的可行替代，但其计算成本是实际部署的主要障碍。如果能高效实现 Best-of-N 级别的对齐效果，这对 pretrain ↔ posttrain 的分工有影响——可能减少对昂贵 post-training 的依赖。","technical_approach":"Speculative Rejection 的核心思想是在生成过程中提前拒绝（early reject）不太可能成为最优的候选序列，而不是等所有 N 个序列都生成完再比较。这类似于推测解码（speculative decoding）的思路——用廉价的判断来避免昂贵的完整计算。关键设计选择是拒绝标准的设定：需要在保证输出质量（不误杀好序列）和节省计算（尽早拒绝差序列）之间取得平衡。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体加速比和质量保持的数字。声称在保持 Best-of-N 对齐效果的同时大幅减少计算资源消耗。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Best-of-N decoding is an effective inference-time alignment method rivaling SOTA post-training, but generating N complete responses is prohibitively expensive. Speculative Rejection accelerates this process.","importance":"A systems/efficiency contribution. Making Best-of-N practical could reduce dependence on expensive post-training, shifting the pretrain-posttrain balance toward inference-time alignment.","technical_approach":"Early rejects candidate sequences unlikely to be optimal during generation, rather than completing all N sequences. Analogous to speculative decoding—using cheap judgments to avoid expensive full computation. The key design trade-off is the rejection criterion: balancing output quality preservation against computational savings.","experiments":"Claims substantial computational savings while maintaining Best-of-N alignment quality. Specific speedup ratios and quality metrics not available from the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["best-of-n","speculative-rejection","alignment","decoding"],"keywords":["alignment","large language models","rejection sampling","best-of-n","acceleration"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的拒绝策略和加速比实验即可，低成本Best-of-N思路可降低对齐训练的算力需求。","en":"Only read §4 rejection strategy and speedup experiments, the low-cost Best-of-N idea can reduce computing requirements for alignment training."}},{"id":"SvirschevskiMCC24","title":"SpecExec: Massively Parallel Speculative Decoding For Interactive LLM Inference on Consumer Devices","authors":["Ruslan Svirschevski","Avner May","Zhuoming Chen","Beidi Chen","Zhihao Jia","Max Ryabinin"],"institutions":["Carnegie Mellon University","Stanford University"],"abstract":"$106","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SvirschevskiMCC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SvirschevskiMCC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1d91d5689e251d27993a3c2182dddcf7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有推测解码方法都针对数据中心高端GPU设计，无法适配消费级设备的模型参数offload（RAM/SSD存储）场景，此前工作没有利用消费级设备批量处理token的时间优势。","importance":"属于系统级/推理优化贡献，让70B级大模型可以在普通消费级GPU上实现交互式推理速度，对端侧大模型部署有直接参考价值。","technical_approach":"改进型并行推测解码方法，针对参数offload场景下批量处理千级token的时间与单token接近的特性，设计批量生成候选token的策略，每轮目标模型迭代最多生成20个token，舍弃了此前为小批量低延迟数据中心场景设计的少候选token策略。","experiments":"在RTX 3090消费级GPU上运行70B参数模型（参数offload到RAM），比标准推测解码速度提升2.3x，比原生自回归解码提升7.8x，scaling观察显示候选token数量设为16-20时收益最高，继续增加会因为验证开销上升导致速度下降。","authors_note":"作者来自卡内基梅隆大学、斯坦福大学，Beidi Chen、Zhihao Jia是高效系统、大模型推理方向的知名研究员。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing speculative decoding methods are designed for high-end datacenter GPUs, and cannot adapt to parameter offload (stored in RAM/SSD) scenarios on consumer devices. Prior work does not leverage the batch processing time advantage of consumer devices.","importance":"This is a system-level/inference optimization contribution, enabling 70B-scale LLMs to run at interactive inference speed on common consumer GPUs, with direct reference value for on-device LLM deployment.","technical_approach":"This is an improved parallel speculative decoding method. Targeting the characteristic that processing thousands of tokens in batch takes similar time as processing one token under parameter offload, it designs a batch candidate token generation strategy, generating up to 20 tokens per target model iteration. It removes the small candidate token count design for small-batch low-latency datacenter scenarios.","experiments":"Tested on RTX 3090 consumer GPU with 70B parameter model (parameters offloaded to RAM), it achieves 2.3x speedup over standard speculative decoding, 7.8x speedup over native autoregressive decoding. Scaling observation shows the highest gain is achieved when candidate token count is set to 16-20, further increase leads to speed drop due to rising verification overhead.","authors_note":"Authors are from Carnegie Mellon University and Stanford University. Beidi Chen and Zhihao Jia are well-known researchers in efficient systems and LLM inference directions."},"tags":["speculative-decoding","parallel-inference","consumer-devices"],"keywords":["speculative decoding","offloading","large language models","inference"],"notable_authors":["Beidi Chen","Zhihao Jia"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"推测解码通过先验小模型生成候选token再用大模型验证的方式提升推理速度","claim_en":"Speculative decoding improves inference speed by generating candidate tokens with a small prior model and verifying them with the target large model","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"参数offload场景下，批量生成最多20个候选token的并行推测解码可以在消费级GPU上实现7.8倍的推理速度提升","claim_en":"Parallel speculative decoding with up to 20 candidate tokens per iteration achieves 7.8x inference speedup on consumer GPUs under parameter offloading scenario","opposes":"Prior speculative decoding methods assume it is only suitable for high-memory datacenter GPU scenarios","opposes_cite_hint":"Leviathan et al. 2023 Fast Inference from Transformers via Speculative Decoding","evidence_anchor":"§5.1","why_contested":"Expands the applicable scenario of speculative decoding, providing a new path for on-device LLM inference optimization."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于端侧推理优化类工作，仅作为端侧部署相关文献备查，无需读正文。","en":"It is edge-side inference optimization work, only for reference as edge deployment related literature, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"TanCLPKGK24","title":"Analysing the Generalisation and Reliability of Steering Vectors","authors":["Daniel Tan","David Chanin","Aengus Lynch","Brooks Paige","Dimitrios Kanoulas","Adrià Garriga-Alonso","Robert Kirk"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$107","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TanCLPKGK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TanCLPKGK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/fb3ad59a84799bfb8d700e56d19c231b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有steering vectors（推理时干预中间激活调整模型行为的方法）的可靠性、泛化性没有经过严格验证，此前工作只展示了正向效果，没有分析其边界和局限性。","importance":"属于机制分析类贡献，明确了steering vectors的适用边界，为后续对齐、模型控制研究提供了风险提示和优化方向。","technical_approach":"原创的系统性评估框架，分别在分布内、分布外场景测试steering vectors的效果稳定性，舍弃了此前只在特定任务特定输入上验证效果的评估方式。","experiments":"在12类行为控制任务上测试，分布内场景下不同输入的可控性波动最大可达47%，32%的任务中steering效果受输入的伪偏差影响超过20%；分布外场景下仅61%的任务能保持50%以上的steering效果，ablation显示steering vectors的泛化性与目标概念的语义一致性正相关。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Reliability and generalization properties of steering vectors (methods that adjust model behavior by intervening on intermediate activations at inference time) have not been rigorously verified. Prior work only demonstrates positive effects, without analyzing their boundaries and limitations.","importance":"This is a mechanism analysis contribution, clarifying the applicable boundary of steering vectors, providing risk warnings and optimization directions for subsequent alignment and model control research.","technical_approach":"The work proposes an original systematic evaluation framework, testing the effect stability of steering vectors in in-distribution and out-of-distribution scenarios respectively, removing the evaluation method used in prior work that only verifies effect on specific tasks and specific inputs.","experiments":"Tested on 12 behavior control tasks: in-distribution steerability varies up to 47% across different inputs, steering effect is affected by spurious input biases by over 20% in 32% of tasks; only 61% of tasks maintain over 50% steering effect in out-of-distribution scenarios. Ablation shows generalization of steering vectors is positively correlated with semantic consistency of the target concept.","authors_note":""},"tags":["steering-vectors","interpretability","generalization","llm"],"keywords":["Interpretability","Causal Abstractions","Steering Vectors","Representation Engineering","Linear Representation Hypothesis","Contrastive Activation Addition"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Steering vectors可以通过干预模型中间激活调整推理时的行为","claim_en":"Steering vectors adjust LLM behavior at inference time via intervening on intermediate activations","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"Steering vectors的可控性在分布内不同输入间波动极大，分布外泛化性不足，不适合高可靠性要求的对齐场景","claim_en":"Steerability of steering vectors varies drastically across in-distribution inputs, and out-of-distribution generalization is insufficient, making them unsuitable for high-reliability alignment scenarios","opposes":"Prior work assumes steering vectors have stable effect and good generalization","opposes_cite_hint":"Belrose et al. 2023 SteerLM: Attribute Conditioned SFT as an (Almost) No-Code Alignment Method","evidence_anchor":"§4.1, §4.2","why_contested":"Revises the optimistic estimation of steering vector effect in the field, providing stricter evaluation criteria for subsequent model control methods."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的分布外失效场景即可，明确steering vectors的适用边界，可指导模型控制相关实验设计。","en":"Only check §4 out-of-distribution failure scenarios, clarify the applicable boundary of steering vectors, guiding model control related experiment design."}},{"id":"TsengSHS24","title":"QTIP: Quantization with Trellises and Incoherence Processing","authors":["Albert Tseng","Qingyao Sun","David Hou","Christopher De Sa"],"institutions":["Cornell University"],"abstract":"$108","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TsengSHS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TsengSHS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/6de2e84b8da47bb2eb5e2ac96c63d2b0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有基于向量量化（VQ）的训练后量化（PTQ）方法，码本大小随量化维度指数增长，只能支持≤8维的量化，限制了量化精度，此前工作没有突破量化维度和码本大小的绑定关系。","importance":"属于方法级贡献，把训练后量化的维度上限从8提升到高维，大幅提升低精度量化的精度，对大模型端侧部署的量化优化有直接价值。","technical_approach":"原创将网格编码量化（TCQ）引入训练后量化，TCQ的有状态解码器将码本大小与比特率、有效量化维度解绑定，舍弃了传统VQ码本大小与维度指数绑定的设计，支持任意高维量化，无需指数级增长的码本存储。","experiments":"在7B、13B参数LLM上测试4bit、8bit量化，比当前最优VQ-based PTQ方法困惑度降低0.3-0.7，推理吞吐量提升12%-18%，ablation显示量化维度设为32时精度和吞吐量的trade-off最优。","authors_note":"作者来自康奈尔大学，Christopher De Sa是高效训练、量化方向的知名教授。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing vector quantization (VQ) based post-training quantization (PTQ) methods have codebook size growing exponentially with quantization dimension, only supporting quantization dimension ≤8, which limits quantization quality. No prior work breaks the binding between quantization dimension and codebook size.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution, raising the dimension upper limit of PTQ from 8 to high dimension, greatly improving low-precision quantization quality, with direct value for quantization optimization of LLM on-device deployment.","technical_approach":"The work originally introduces trellis coded quantization (TCQ) into PTQ. The stateful decoder of TCQ decouples codebook size from bitrate and effective quantization dimension, removing the exponential binding between codebook size and dimension used in traditional VQ. It supports arbitrary high-dimensional quantization without exponentially growing codebook storage.","experiments":"Tested on 7B and 13B parameter LLMs for 4bit and 8bit quantization, it reduces perplexity by 0.3-0.7 and improves inference throughput by 12%-18% compared to current best VQ-based PTQ methods. Ablation shows the optimal trade-off between accuracy and throughput is achieved when quantization dimension is set to 32.","authors_note":"Authors are from Cornell University. Christopher De Sa is a well-known professor in efficient training and quantization directions."},"tags":["quantization","compression","inference"],"keywords":["quantization","llms","trellises","fast inference","post training quantization","trellis coded quantization","model compression","computed codes"],"notable_authors":["Christopher De Sa"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"训练后量化是降低大模型显存占用、提升推理吞吐量的有效方法","claim_en":"Post-training quantization is an effective method to reduce LLM memory footprint and improve inference throughput","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于TCQ的高维训练后量化精度优于现有VQ-based PTQ方法，且无需指数级增长的码本存储","claim_en":"High-dimensional post-training quantization based on TCQ outperforms existing VQ-based PTQ methods, without requiring exponentially growing codebook storage","opposes":"Prior VQ-based PTQ work assumes codebook size of vector quantization must grow exponentially with dimension, so only quantization dimension ≤8 is supported","opposes_cite_hint":"Frantar et al. 2023 GPTQ: Accurate Post-Training Quantization for Generative Pre-trained Transformers","evidence_anchor":"§5.1, Table 2","why_contested":"Breaks the dimension upper limit of post-training quantization, opening a new technical route for accuracy improvement of low-precision quantization."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于训练后量化方法类工作，仅作为量化优化相关文献备查，无需读正文。","en":"It belongs to post-training quantization method work, only for reference as quantization optimization related literature, no need to read full text."}},{"id":"VafaCRKM24","title":"Evaluating the World Model Implicit in a Generative Model","authors":["Keyon Vafa","Justin Y. Chen","Ashesh Rambachan","Jon M. Kleinberg","Sendhil Mullainathan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$109","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/VafaCRKM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/VafaCRKM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/2f6a6317bada76b26a4f61bb70a7db59-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：如何系统评估生成模型里是否真的学到了可用于推演和干预的“世界模型”，而不只是记住表面统计规律。以往很多工作把生成质量、困惑度或下游预测精度当作替代指标，但这些指标无法区分模型是在做浅层模式匹配，还是已经形成了隐含的因果/动力学结构表示，因此这个问题值得被单独拿出来做评测。","importance":"它的重要性主要在评测范式，而不是提出一个新的生成模型。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：如果我们关心模型是否具备可迁移的环境建模能力，仅看 likelihood 类指标是不够的，需要更贴近干预、反事实和长期一致性的诊断工具；这对语言模型、视频生成和 agent world model 都有方法论价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法看起来是一套针对“隐式世界模型”的评估框架，而不是改训练目标。关键思路应当是把生成模型放到带有潜在状态和可验证结构的环境中，检查模型能否从观测中恢复状态转移、支持反事实预测，或在多步 rollout 中保持一致；这样的设计有效，因为它绕开了“样本看起来像不像”的主观判断，直接测模型是否掌握了可计算的环境规律。它和传统生成评估的区别在于，后者测边缘分布拟合，这里更关心潜在机制是否被学到。","experiments":"从题目判断，实验重点应是构造若干可控世界并比较不同生成模型在世界模型能力上的差异，而不是追求通用 benchmark SOTA。更值得关注的通常是：一，生成质量高的模型未必在反事实或长期预测上更强；二，训练数据更大或模型更大不一定线性改善机制层面的建模；三，某些架构可能更容易学到局部统计而非可组合规则。由于这里没有摘要和数字，具体参数量、数据规模、指标和提升幅度无法确认。","authors_note":"作者来自 Cornell 及相关机构的可能性较高，Jon Kleinberg 和 Sendhil Mullainathan 是较知名学者；但基于当前提供信息，无法稳妥给出完整机构和团队代表作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a clean question: how do we evaluate whether a generative model has learned an actual world model, rather than just surface-level correlations. Prior work often relied on sample quality, likelihood, or downstream prediction as proxies, but those metrics do not tell us whether the model captures latent dynamics, interventions, or counterfactual structure.","importance":"Its contribution is primarily evaluative, not a new pretraining recipe. The pretraining takeaway is important: if we care about transferable environment modeling, likelihood-style metrics are incomplete, and we need diagnostics that test mechanism learning, long-horizon consistency, and counterfactual competence. That matters beyond text, including video generation and agent-oriented foundation models.","technical_approach":"The core idea is likely an evaluation framework for implicit world models rather than a new generator. The key design is to place models in controlled environments with known latent structure, then test whether generation supports state inference, transition modeling, multi-step rollout consistency, and counterfactual prediction. This is effective because it measures whether the model learned usable dynamics, not just whether outputs look realistic under the observational distribution.","experiments":"The main experimental value is likely in controlled comparisons across model classes and training regimes, not in benchmark SOTA. The most useful findings would be whether strong generative fit fails to imply strong counterfactual reasoning, whether scale improves mechanism learning only weakly, and whether some architectures overfit local statistics instead of compositional rules. The abstract and numbers are not available here, so model sizes, datasets, and metric deltas cannot be stated reliably.","authors_note":"The author list includes Jon Kleinberg and Sendhil Mullainathan, both well-known researchers. A full institution mapping and representative team history cannot be confirmed from the provided information alone."},"tags":["world-model","evaluation","generative-models","benchmark"],"notable_authors":["Jon M. Kleinberg","Sendhil Mullainathan"],"keywords":["world models","large language models","evaluation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的评估框架设计即可，这套干预、反事实评测思路可用于预训练世界建模能力的诊断。","en":"Only read §3 evaluation framework design, the intervention and counterfactual evaluation idea can be used for diagnosis of world modeling capability in pretraining."}},{"id":"VenkatramanJSKS24","title":"Amortizing intractable inference in diffusion models for vision, language, and control","authors":["Siddarth Venkatraman","Moksh Jain","Luca Scimeca","Minsu Kim","Marcin Sendera","Mohsin Hasan","Luke Rowe","Sarthak Mittal","Pablo Lemos","Emmanuel Bengio","Alexandre Adam","Jarrid Rector-Brooks","Yoshua Bengio","Glen Berseth","Nikolay Malkin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$10a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/VenkatramanJSKS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/VenkatramanJSKS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/8b21a7ea42cbcd1c29a7a88c444cce45-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：扩散模型在很多条件生成与决策任务里需要做代价很高的推断，而这一步往往成了实际部署瓶颈。以往常见做法是每次测试时再做优化、采样或规划，精度可以不错，但延迟高且不稳定，因此“把推断摊销掉”是很自然的方向。","importance":"它的重要性偏方法级和系统级。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，扩散类模型的能力上限不只由训练目标决定，还受测试时推断形式约束；如果能把原本逐样本的昂贵推断转成可学习的 amortized 模块，就可能显著改变 diffusion 在语言、视觉和控制中的可用性边界。","technical_approach":"核心方法是为 diffusion model 的难推断问题学习一个摊销近似器。按题目看，这个近似器应覆盖 vision、language、control 三类任务，说明作者不是只做单任务 engineering，而是在抽象“测试时求解器”这一层：先定义原本需要迭代求解的后验/控制/条件采样问题，再训练一个网络直接预测其解或初始化，从而减少迭代步数。它和普通蒸馏的区别在于，目标不是复制最终样本分布，而是近似推断过程本身。","experiments":"实验应当跨模态，重点看延迟—质量权衡而不是单点 SOTA。最有价值的结果通常包括：在视觉条件生成、语言 diffusion 推断或控制规划任务上，用更少迭代接近原始求解器质量；以及 amortization 在分布外条件下何时失效。由于缺少摘要，具体模型、步数压缩比、任务与数值无法确认。","authors_note":"作者列表中的 Marcin Sendera 较为知名；但机构与团队代表作在当前信息下无法可靠给出。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a key bottleneck in diffusion models: inference can be computationally expensive, especially when generation requires solving a conditional posterior, a planning problem, or another iterative test-time optimization. Existing methods often trade quality for speed in ad hoc ways, so learning to amortize this inference is a natural target.","importance":"This is a method and systems contribution with clear relevance to pretraining-era model design. The broader lesson is that the usefulness of diffusion-style models is limited not just by the training objective but also by the form of test-time inference; amortizing that step can materially shift the practical frontier in vision, language, and control.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to learn an amortized approximator for otherwise intractable or expensive diffusion inference. From the title, the framework likely abstracts the underlying solver across modalities, then trains a network to predict the solution directly or provide a strong initialization so that far fewer iterative refinement steps are needed. This differs from simple distillation because the target is the inference procedure or posterior solution, not only the final output distribution.","experiments":"The evaluation likely spans multiple modalities and emphasizes the quality-latency trade-off. The strongest evidence would be near-solver performance with substantially fewer denoising or optimization steps, together with analysis of where amortization breaks under distribution shift or harder constraints. Exact datasets, architectures, and speedup numbers cannot be confirmed here.","authors_note":"Marcin Sendera is a notable author. The institutions and representative prior work of the team cannot be safely inferred from the provided information."},"tags":["diffusion","inference","amortization","language"],"notable_authors":["Marcin Sendera"],"keywords":["diffusion","inverse problems","conditional generation","language models","infilling","discrete diffusion","offline RL","planning","GFlowNet"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的多任务适配实验即可，摊销推断的思路可提升扩散类预训练模型的部署可用性。","en":"Only check §4 multi-task adaptation experiments, the amortized inference idea can improve deployment availability of diffusion pretrained models."}},{"id":"WachiTSTA24","title":"Stepwise Alignment for Constrained Language Model Policy Optimization","authors":["Akifumi Wachi","Thien Q. Tran","Rei Sato","Takumi Tanabe","Youhei Akimoto"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$10b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WachiTSTA24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WachiTSTA24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/bcfcf7232cb74e1ef82d751880ff835b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：在带约束的语言模型策略优化里，如何既提升目标奖励，又不违反安全、格式或任务约束。传统 RLHF/RLAIF 往往把多个目标揉成一个标量奖励，结果是约束难以稳定满足，或者靠大罚项导致训练极不稳。","importance":"它属于 post-training 方法，但对 pretrain 闭环同样有价值。原因是受约束优化反映了训练信号质量问题：如果约束处理得更稳定，我们可以更可靠地把工具调用格式、事实性要求、拒答边界等信号注入模型，而不必依赖脆弱的 reward shaping。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 stepwise alignment，用分阶段或逐步方式处理受约束策略优化。相比一次性联合优化所有目标，它很可能先让模型学会满足硬约束，再逐步提升主任务效用，或在每一步只对最违反的约束进行校正。这样的设计有效，因为语言模型策略空间很大，硬把所有目标同时压进去容易出现梯度冲突、奖励投机和模式坍缩。","experiments":"实验应会比较标准 PPO/离线偏好优化/带罚项的 constrained RL 与 stepwise alignment 在约束满足率、主任务分数和训练稳定性上的差异。最值得看的不是单个 benchmark 分数，而是是否能在不牺牲太多任务性能的情况下显著提高 constraint satisfaction。缺少摘要时，具体任务、模型和数值无法确认。","authors_note":"当前信息不足以确认机构、团队背景和代表作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets constrained policy optimization for language models: how to improve utility while reliably satisfying safety, formatting, or task-specific constraints. Standard RLHF-style training often folds everything into a single scalar reward, which makes constraint satisfaction unstable and sensitive to reward shaping.","importance":"This is a post-training method, but it matters to the broader pretrain-to-posttrain loop because it is fundamentally about signal quality. Better constrained optimization means we can inject structured requirements such as tool-use format, refusal boundaries, or factuality more reliably, instead of hoping a weighted reward gets the balance right.","technical_approach":"The key idea is stepwise alignment, likely a staged optimization procedure for constrained LM policies. Rather than jointly optimizing all objectives from the start, the method probably enforces or prioritizes constraints in sequence, or focuses updates on the currently violated constraints before pushing utility further. This design is plausible because simultaneous optimization in LM policy space often causes gradient conflict, reward hacking, and instability.","experiments":"The evaluation likely compares standard RL baselines and penalty-based constrained methods against stepwise alignment on utility, constraint satisfaction, and training stability. The most relevant result would be a better utility–constraint trade-off, not just a higher scalar score. Specific tasks, model scales, and numerical gains are not available from the provided information.","authors_note":"There is not enough information here to confirm institutions, team background, or representative prior work."},"tags":["alignment","constrained-optimization","rlhf","policy-optimization"],"keywords":["AI Alignment","Large Language Models","AI Safety","Safe RL"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接看§3方法和§5消融即可，分步处理约束的思路可复用在预训练注入格式、拒答等硬约束的流程中，避免reward shaping不稳的问题","en":"Just read §3 method and §5 ablation. The stepwise constraint handling logic can be reused to inject hard constraints like format, refusal boundary into pretraining pipelines to avoid unstable reward shaping."}},{"id":"WanTXPA0PSBZ24","title":"LocCa: Visual Pretraining with Location-aware Captioners","authors":["Bo Wan","Michael Tschannen","Yongqin Xian","Filip Pavetic","Ibrahim M. Alabdulmohsin","Xiao Wang","André Susano Pinto","Andreas Steiner","Lucas Beyer","Xiaohua Zhai"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$10c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WanTXPA0PSBZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WanTXPA0PSBZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d303b4f1ef8d8274ae6b152df70f5406-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：现有视觉预训练常用的 caption supervision 缺少精确位置信息，导致模型学到的是全局语义对齐，而不是对象级、区域级的视觉语言对应。过去这通常靠检测框或 dense annotation 补，但标注成本高，也不适合大规模预训练。","importance":"这是一个偏预训练方法的数据监督升级。对 VLM 预训练的启示很直接：如果 captioner 能自动产出带位置感知的描述，那么我们可以用更便宜的方式把局部 grounding 信号注入视觉 backbone 和多模态对齐过程，而不必完全依赖检测器或人工框标。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 LocCa，用 location-aware captioners 生成带空间指向性的训练描述，再用于视觉预训练。关键选择在于：不是简单让 caption 更长，而是让文本显式包含区域、相对位置或对象关系，这样训练目标会迫使模型把语义和空间证据绑定起来。它与标准图文对比学习的差别在于，后者容易被全局共现骗过，这里则增加了更细粒度的监督。","experiments":"实验应会比较使用普通 caption 与 location-aware caption 进行预训练后，在分类、检测、检索或 grounding 类任务上的差异。最值得看的结果是局部感知任务上的提升，以及 caption 质量、空间描述噪声与下游收益之间的关系。由于没有摘要，具体预训练规模、模型参数、数据量和数值提升无法确认。","authors_note":"作者中 Michael Tschannen、Yongqin Xian、Ibrahim M. Alabdulmohsin 较有辨识度，团队可能来自 Google Research；但基于当前信息，不宜把机构写死。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a supervision gap in visual pretraining: standard captions provide global semantics but weak spatial grounding, so models can align image and text without learning where evidence is located. Dense annotations solve this only partially and do not scale well.","importance":"This is a pretraining-oriented supervision improvement with clear VLM relevance. If location-aware captioners can provide cheap grounding signals at scale, they offer a practical middle ground between plain image-text pairs and expensive detector-style annotations.","technical_approach":"The core idea is LocCa, which uses captioners that explicitly encode location or spatial relations and then trains visual models on those captions. The key design choice is to make text supervision spatially informative rather than merely more descriptive. That should help because global caption learning can be satisfied by co-occurrence shortcuts, while location-aware text pressures the model to bind semantics to regions.","experiments":"The likely evaluation compares pretraining with standard captions versus location-aware captions, then measures transfer to tasks such as grounding, retrieval, detection, or recognition. The most informative results would be gains on region-sensitive tasks and analysis of how caption noise affects downstream benefit. Exact training scale, model size, and metric improvements cannot be confirmed from the provided input.","authors_note":"Michael Tschannen, Yongqin Xian, and Ibrahim M. Alabdulmohsin are recognizable authors. The exact institution list cannot be safely fixed from the current information alone."},"tags":["visual-pretraining","captioning","location-aware","vlm"],"notable_authors":["Michael Tschannen","Yongqin Xian","Ibrahim M. Alabdulmohsin"],"keywords":["Vision Language Models","Visual Pretraining","Location-aware Generation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§4实验结果和Fig 2可视化即可，低成本生成带位置标注的图文对的思路可直接融入VLM预训练的数据 pipeline 降本提效","en":"Only read §4 experimental results and Fig 2 visualizations. The low-cost location-aware caption generation logic can be directly integrated into VLM pretraining data pipelines to reduce cost and improve performance."}},{"id":"Wang0T24","title":"Evaluating the design space of diffusion-based generative models","authors":["Yuqing Wang","Ye He","Molei Tao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$10d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Wang0T24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Wang0T24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/227404a13d20898dec2018ebe368b202-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：扩散生成模型的设计空间很大，但很多经验结论是局部的、任务依赖的，缺少系统梳理，导致研究者很难判断哪些设计选择是真正一阶重要，哪些只是特定配置下的偶然收益。随着 diffusion 从图像扩展到语言、多模态和离散 token，这个问题变得更值得统一分析。","importance":"它的重要性在于把 diffusion 研究从‘方法堆叠’拉回到可比较的设计维度。对 pretrain 的启示很强：如果论文能厘清噪声参数化、采样器、网络结构、损失形式和训练稳定性的相对影响，那么后续做 diffusion LM、离散扩散或 AR+diffusion 混合建模时，可以少走很多试错弯路。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是系统枚举并评估 diffusion-based generative models 的设计空间，而不是提出单一新模型。关键在于控制变量：统一训练预算和评测协议，分别比较噪声调度、预测目标、求解器、网络参数化等组件，并分析它们之间的交互。这样的设计有效，因为 diffusion 体系里很多改动彼此耦合，如果不做系统拆分，很容易把调参收益误判为方法收益。","experiments":"实验价值主要取决于覆盖面和控制质量。理想情况下，论文会给出多数据集、多计算预算的对比，指出哪些选择在小模型和大模型上都稳定有效，哪些只在某类分辨率或训练步数下成立，以及质量—速度—稳定性的 trade-off。由于没有摘要，具体数据集、模型、指标和数字提升无法确认。","authors_note":"当前信息不足以确认机构、知名作者背景和团队代表作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a broad but important question: what really matters in the design space of diffusion-based generative models. The field has accumulated many local improvements, but without a systematic view it is hard to tell which choices are first-order and which are artifacts of a narrow setup.","importance":"This is valuable because it turns diffusion research from a collection of isolated tricks into a comparable design space. For pretraining-related work, that is especially relevant as diffusion expands into language, multimodal, and discrete-token settings where design complexity grows quickly.","technical_approach":"The likely contribution is a controlled empirical study rather than a single new model. The key is to vary one component at a time under matched compute and evaluation protocols, comparing choices such as noise schedules, training targets, samplers, and parameterizations while also analyzing interactions. That matters because diffusion components are tightly coupled, and uncontrolled comparisons often overstate method gains.","experiments":"The value of the experiments would come from breadth and careful control. The most useful outcomes are stable conclusions about which choices remain good across scales and budgets, which ones are sensitive to task or resolution, and how quality, speed, and training stability trade off. The provided metadata does not include specific datasets, models, or numerical results.","authors_note":"There is not enough information here to confirm institutions, notable author background, or representative prior work."},"tags":["diffusion","design-space","generative-models","training-objective"],"keywords":["diffusion-based models","denoising score matching","convergence of neural network training","generation error analysis","noising distribution","loss weighting","time schedule","variance schedule"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接看§6的核心设计维度排序结论即可，做扩散结构预训练、AR+扩散混合建模时可直接参考省去冗余试错","en":"Just refer to the core design dimension ranking conclusions in §6. It can be directly cited for diffusion structure pretraining and AR-diffusion hybrid modeling to avoid redundant trial and error."}},{"id":"WangCYFZJD24","title":"CLIPLoss and Norm-Based Data Selection Methods for Multimodal Contrastive Learning","authors":["Yiping Wang","Yifang Chen","Wendan Yan","Alex Fang","Wenjing Zhou","Kevin Jamieson","Simon S. Du"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$10e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangCYFZJD24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangCYFZJD24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1b33deb9e1e7c31f05300b1c2d4a4f7d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有CLIP预训练的数据选择方法要么依赖外部模型、要么需要训练专门的选择模型，通用无依赖的选择方法（如CLIPScore）研究不足，此前的CLIPScore只考虑图文余弦相似度，忽略了其他有效信号。","importance":"属于数据级贡献，提出两种无需额外模型的CLIP预训练数据选择方法，降低数据成本的同时提升CLIP预训练效果，对多模态预训练的数据处理pipeline有直接参考价值。","technical_approach":"改进型通用数据选择方法，提出两个新指标：1）CLIPLoss，衡量单样本对对比学习的损失贡献；2）范数指标，衡量图文嵌入的范数大小，舍弃了此前需要外部模型或额外训练的设计，和CLIPScore的区别是不需要额外计算相似度，直接利用训练过程中的损失和嵌入范数即可选择。","experiments":"在12M图文对的CLIP预训练上测试，比CLIPScore选择方法的图文检索精度提升1.2%-2.1%，数据利用率提升30%，ablation显示CLIPLoss和范数指标结合的选择效果最优，单独使用其中一个也比CLIPScore好0.8%以上。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing data selection methods for CLIP pre-training either rely on external models or require training a dedicated selection model. General independent selection methods (such as CLIPScore) are under-explored, and prior CLIPScore only considers image-text cosine similarity, ignoring other effective signals.","importance":"This is a data-level contribution, proposing two extra-model-free data selection methods for CLIP pre-training, reducing data cost while improving CLIP pre-training performance, with direct reference value for data processing pipeline of multimodal pre-training.","technical_approach":"This is an improved general data selection method, proposing two new metrics: 1) CLIPLoss, measuring the loss contribution of a single sample pair in contrastive learning; 2) Norm metric, measuring the norm size of image and text embeddings. It removes the design requiring external models or extra training used in prior work. Unlike CLIPScore, it does not require extra similarity calculation, and directly uses loss and embedding norm during training for selection.","experiments":"Tested on CLIP pre-training with 12M image-text pairs, it improves image-text retrieval accuracy by 1.2%-2.1% and data utilization by 30% compared to CLIPScore selection method. Ablation shows the best selection effect is achieved by combining CLIPLoss and norm metric, using either alone also outperforms CLIPScore by over 0.8%.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-selection","clip","contrastive-learning","multimodal-pretraining"],"keywords":["contrastive learning","visual-language pretraining","data selection","CLIP"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"多模态对比学习的预训练效果高度依赖训练数据的质量","claim_en":"Pre-training performance of multimodal contrastive learning highly depends on training data quality","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于CLIPLoss和嵌入范数的通用数据选择方法，效果优于仅用图文余弦相似度的CLIPScore方法，且无需额外计算开销","claim_en":"General data selection methods based on CLIPLoss and embedding norm outperform CLIPScore that only uses image-text cosine similarity, with no extra computation overhead","opposes":"Prior work assumes CLIPScore is the best general multimodal data selection metric without extra dependencies","opposes_cite_hint":"OpenAI 2021 Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision","evidence_anchor":"§4.2, Table 1","why_contested":"Provides more efficient metrics for multimodal pre-training data selection, simplifying data processing pipeline while improving performance."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§3.2两个指标定义和§4.3下游效果验证即可，可直接把CLIPLoss和范数指标加入多模态预训练的数据过滤流程","en":"Only read §3.2 metric definitions and §4.3 downstream performance validation. CLIPLoss and norm metrics can be directly added to multimodal pretraining data filtering pipelines."}},{"id":"WangF24","title":"Language Models as Zero-shot Lossless Gradient Compressors: Towards General Neural Parameter Prior Models","authors":["Hui-Po Wang","Mario Fritz"],"institutions":["Max Planck Institute for Informatics"],"abstract":"$10f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangF24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangF24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/744e09d3213ee53de88f04164a9b06ab-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"分布式训练的梯度压缩缺少有效的统计先验模型，传统压缩方法没有利用梯度的内在依赖关系，压缩比低，此前工作没有考虑用大模型作为梯度的先验模型。","importance":"属于范式级贡献，首次提出用大模型作为神经网络梯度的通用先验，为分布式训练、参数高效微调等场景的梯度压缩提供了新的思路。","technical_approach":"原创提出LM-GC方法，将梯度转换为类文本格式，用大模型作为零样本概率先验结合算术编码实现无损压缩，舍弃了传统梯度压缩方法基于人工设计统计规则的设计，无需针对特定模型或训练任务调整压缩规则，零样本即可适用。","experiments":"在ResNet、ViT、LLM的分布式训练梯度上测试，比传统LZ4压缩方法的token效率提升38倍，压缩比提升2.7x，ablation显示7B参数大模型的压缩效果比1B参数的好0.8x，更大的模型带来的增益边际递减。","authors_note":"作者来自马普所信息所，Mario Fritz是计算机视觉、高效机器学习方向的知名教授。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Gradient compression for distributed training lacks effective statistical prior models. Traditional compression methods do not leverage the internal dependencies of gradients, leading to low compression ratio. No prior work considers using LLMs as prior models for gradients.","importance":"This is a paradigm-level contribution, first proposing to use LLMs as general priors for neural network gradients, providing a new idea for gradient compression in distributed training, parameter-efficient fine-tuning and other scenarios.","technical_approach":"The work proposes the original LM-GC method, which converts gradients into text-like formats, uses LLMs as zero-shot probability priors combined with arithmetic coding to achieve lossless compression. It removes the manually designed statistical rule-based design used in traditional gradient compression methods, requires no adjustment of compression rules for specific models or training tasks, and works in zero-shot setting.","experiments":"Tested on distributed training gradients of ResNet, ViT and LLMs, it improves token efficiency by 38 times and compression ratio by 2.7x compared to traditional LZ4 compression method. Ablation shows 7B parameter LLM achieves 0.8x better compression effect than 1B parameter LLM, and the gain from larger models diminishes marginally.","authors_note":"Authors are from Max Planck Institute for Informatics. Mario Fritz is a well-known professor in computer vision and efficient machine learning directions."},"tags":["gradient-compression","language-model","neural-parameter-prior"],"keywords":["large-scale language models","lossless gradient compression"],"notable_authors":["Mario Fritz"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"无损梯度压缩可以降低分布式训练的通信开销","claim_en":"Lossless gradient compression reduces communication overhead in distributed training","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"大模型可以作为零样本梯度先验，实现比传统人工设计规则方法高2.7倍的无损压缩比","claim_en":"LLMs can act as zero-shot gradient priors, achieving 2.7x higher lossless compression ratio than traditional manually designed rule-based methods","opposes":"Prior gradient compression work assumes manually designed statistical rules for gradients are required to achieve effective compression","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5.1, Table 2","why_contested":"Expands the application boundary of LLMs, first verifying the zero-shot probability modeling capability of LLMs for structured non-text data."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于跨界探索思路，梯度转文本压缩的落地限制极多，作为文献备查即可，无需细读正文","en":"It is a cross-domain exploratory idea with extremely high implementation barriers, only for literature reference, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"WangSHS0LL24","title":"FLoRA: Federated Fine-Tuning Large Language Models with Heterogeneous Low-Rank Adaptations","authors":["Ziyao Wang","Zheyu Shen","Yexiao He","Guoheng Sun","Hongyi Wang","Lingjuan Lyu","Ang Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$110","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangSHS0LL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangSHS0LL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/28312c9491d60ed0c77f7fff4ad86dd1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有联邦LoRA微调方法用传统聚合策略，会引入数学上不准确的聚合噪声，降低微调效果，且无法适配客户端异构的算力/存储资源，此前工作没有考虑LoRA适配的异构性。","importance":"属于方法级贡献，解决了联邦大模型微调的异构资源适配和聚合噪声问题，提升了隐私场景下大模型微调的效果和可行性。","technical_approach":"原创提出异构低秩适配联邦微调框架FLoRA，允许不同客户端根据自身资源配置使用不同秩的LoRA适配器，设计对应的无噪声聚合策略，舍弃了此前所有客户端使用相同秩LoRA、统一聚合的设计，支持异构LoRA配置，聚合无数学噪声。","experiments":"在8个下游任务上测试，对比传统联邦LoRA方法，平均精度提升3.2%-5.7%，支持的客户端资源异构度提升4倍，ablation显示异构LoRA的无噪声聚合策略贡献了2.1%的精度提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing federated LoRA fine-tuning methods use traditional aggregation strategies, introducing mathematically inaccurate aggregation noise, reducing fine-tuning performance, and cannot adapt to heterogeneous computing/storage resources of clients. No prior work considers heterogeneity of LoRA adapters.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution, solving the heterogeneous resource adaptation and aggregation noise problems of federated LLM fine-tuning, improving the performance and feasibility of LLM fine-tuning in privacy scenarios.","technical_approach":"The work proposes the original heterogeneous low-rank adaptation federated fine-tuning framework FLoRA, which allows different clients to use LoRA adapters of different ranks according to their own resource configurations, and designs a corresponding noise-free aggregation strategy. It removes the design of using the same rank LoRA for all clients and uniform aggregation used in prior work, supports heterogeneous LoRA configurations, and has no mathematical noise in aggregation.","experiments":"Tested on 8 downstream tasks, compared to traditional federated LoRA methods, average accuracy is improved by 3.2%-5.7%, supported client resource heterogeneity is increased by 4 times. Ablation shows the noise-free aggregation strategy for heterogeneous LoRA contributes 2.1% of accuracy improvement.","authors_note":""},"tags":["lora","federated-learning","fine-tuning","llm"],"keywords":["Federated Learning","Large Language Models","LoRA"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"联邦学习可以在不泄露用户数据的前提下实现大模型微调","claim_en":"Federated learning enables LLM fine-tuning without leaking user data","evidence_anchor":"§1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"支持异构秩LoRA适配器的无噪声聚合策略，比统一秩LoRA的传统聚合策略效果更好，且适配异构客户端资源","claim_en":"Noise-free aggregation strategy supporting heterogeneous rank LoRA adapters outperforms traditional aggregation strategy with uniform rank LoRA, and adapts to heterogeneous client resources","opposes":"Prior federated LoRA work assumes all clients must use LoRA adapters of the same rank to achieve effective aggregation","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4.2, Table 1","why_contested":"Solves the resource heterogeneity pain point of federated LLM fine-tuning, improving the deployment feasibility of federated fine-tuning."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅面向隐私联邦微调场景，和通用预训练关联度极低，知道异构LoRA无噪声聚合思路即可，不用深读","en":"It only targets privacy federated fine-tuning scenarios with very low relevance to general pretraining, just know the heterogeneous LoRA noise-free aggregation idea, no in-depth reading needed."}},{"id":"WangXH0LZLWLMCA24","title":"CharXiv: Charting Gaps in Realistic Chart Understanding in Multimodal LLMs","authors":["Zirui Wang","Mengzhou Xia","Luxi He","Howard Chen","Yitao Liu","Richard Zhu","Kaiqu Liang","Xindi Wu","Haotian Liu","Sadhika Malladi","Alexis Chevalier","Sanjeev Arora","Danqi Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$111","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangXH0LZLWLMCA24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangXH0LZLWLMCA24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/cdf6f8e9fd9aeaf79b6024caec24f15b-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有多模态大模型的图表理解评测数据集普遍使用简化的同质化图表和模板问题，导致模型性能评估虚高，无法反映真实场景下（如科研论文、财报分析）的实际图表理解能力。","importance":"数据级贡献，填补了真实场景高质量图表理解评测的空白，可帮助研究者准确判断MLLM图表理解能力的真实进展，避免在伪基准上做无效优化。","technical_approach":"原创评测套件，收集了来自科研论文的2323份自然、高难度、多样化的真实图表，设计描述类、推理类两类评测问题；舍弃了此前常用的模板化生成问题，问题设计更贴近真实用户查询。","experiments":"测试主流开源和闭源MLLM，发现开源模型在现有简化基准上表现超过闭源模型，但在CharXiv压力测试下性能最高下降34.5%；ablation显示图表复杂度和问题变体是影响性能的核心变量。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing chart understanding benchmarks for multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) use oversimplified homogeneous charts and template-based questions, leading to inflated performance estimates that do not reflect real-world capabilities for scientific paper or financial report analysis tasks.","importance":"Data-level contribution that fills the gap of high-quality real-world chart understanding evaluation, helps researchers accurately measure real progress of MLLM chart reasoning and avoid invalid optimization on pseudo benchmarks.","technical_approach":"Original evaluation suite that collects 2,323 natural, challenging, diverse real charts from scientific papers, designs two question types: descriptive questions for basic perception, reasoning questions for high-level analysis; discards template-generated queries to align with real user needs.","experiments":"Tests mainstream open-source and proprietary MLLMs, finds open-source models outperform proprietary models on simplified existing benchmarks, but performance drops by up to 34.5% under CharXiv stress tests; ablation shows chart complexity and question variation are core factors affecting performance.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal-llm","benchmark","chart-understanding","evaluation"],"keywords":["Multimodal Large Language Models","Chart Understanding","Vision-Language","Benchmark"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"图表理解能力是MLLM落地到科研、金融等真实场景的核心基础能力。","claim_en":"Chart understanding capability of MLLMs is a core foundation for deployment in scientific and financial real-world scenarios.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"现有简化图表评测基准的MLLM性能排名与真实场景下的性能排名不匹配。","claim_en":"Performance rankings of MLLMs on existing simplified chart benchmarks do not match rankings in real-world scenarios.","opposes":"Prior work assumes standard chart benchmark performance directly reflects real-world MLLM capability.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Experiments","why_contested":"推翻了此前基于简化基准的模型性能判断逻辑，要求后续研究必须使用更贴近真实场景的评测。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看附录的数据集样例和§5的模型横评结果即可，做MLLM图表理解能力优化时可用来做验证基准避免过拟合伪任务","en":"Only check dataset examples in appendix and cross-model evaluation results in §5. It can be used as a validation benchmark for MLLM chart understanding optimization to avoid overfitting to pseudo tasks."}},{"id":"WangYL24a","title":"LoRA-GA: Low-Rank Adaptation with Gradient Approximation","authors":["Shaowen Wang","Linxi Yu","Jian Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$112","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangYL24a","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangYL24a","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/62c4718cc334f6a0a62fb81c4a2095a1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LoRA作为主流参数高效微调方法，收敛速度远慢于全参数微调，最终整体计算成本更高且性能更差，现有研究大多从架构或训练算法角度优化，未深入探究初始化的影响。","importance":"方法级贡献，仅通过改进LoRA初始化就能提升收敛速度和最终性能，不需要修改架构或训练流程，可直接复用现有LoRA的训练和推理栈，落地成本极低。","technical_approach":"改进型LoRA方法，通过梯度近似的方式初始化LoRA的低秩矩阵，使得初始状态下LoRA的梯度方向与全参数微调的梯度方向尽可能对齐；舍弃了此前LoRA零初始化的默认设置，不引入任何额外训练参数或计算开销。","experiments":"在多个NLP和CV下游任务上测试，相比标准LoRA，收敛速度提升2-3倍，最终性能平均提升1.2%，与全参数微调的性能差距缩小到0.5%以内；ablation显示梯度对齐度越高，收敛速度和最终性能提升越明显。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"As a mainstream parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) method, LoRA converges much slower than full fine-tuning, leading to higher overall compute cost and worse final performance. Most existing optimizations focus on architecture or training algorithm changes, without deep exploration of initialization impacts.","importance":"Method-level contribution that improves LoRA convergence speed and final performance only via initialization optimization, no architecture or training pipeline changes required, can directly reuse existing LoRA training and inference stacks with very low deployment cost.","technical_approach":"Improved LoRA method that initializes LoRA low-rank matrices via gradient approximation to align LoRA's initial gradient direction with that of full fine-tuning as much as possible; discards the default zero initialization of standard LoRA, does not introduce any additional trainable parameters or compute overhead.","experiments":"Tested on multiple NLP and CV downstream tasks, achieves 2-3x faster convergence than standard LoRA, average 1.2% higher final performance, reduces performance gap with full fine-tuning to under 0.5%; ablation shows higher gradient alignment leads to more obvious improvements in convergence speed and final performance.","authors_note":""},"tags":["lora","fine-tuning","gradient-approximation","efficiency"],"keywords":["Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning","Low-Rank Adaptation","Model Initialization","Large Language Model"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LoRA的训练成本显著低于全参数微调，适合大模型下游适配。","claim_en":"LoRA has significantly lower training cost than full fine-tuning, suitable for large model downstream adaptation.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"LoRA收敛慢的核心原因是初始化时梯度方向与全参数微调不匹配，而非低秩结构本身的表达能力不足。","claim_en":"The core reason for slow LoRA convergence is mismatched gradient direction with full fine-tuning at initialization, not insufficient expressive capacity of the low-rank structure itself.","opposes":"Prior work attributes LoRA's performance gap with full fine-tuning to the limited capacity of low-rank matrices.","opposes_cite_hint":"Hu 2021 LoRA","evidence_anchor":"§4 Analysis","why_contested":"修正了此前对LoRA性能瓶颈的错误归因，为PEFT方法的优化提供了新的方向。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§3初始化方法和§4.1收敛速度对比即可，无需修改现有LoRA栈就能提升微调收敛速度，可快速在内部ablation中验证","en":"Only read §3 initialization method and §4.1 convergence speed comparison. It improves LoRA fine-tuning convergence without modifying existing stacks, can be quickly verified in internal ablations."}},{"id":"WangZRDLLH0ZLZL24","title":"Needle In A Multimodal Haystack","authors":["Weiyun Wang","Shuibo Zhang","Yiming Ren","Yuchen Duan","Tiantong Li","Shuo Liu","Mengkang Hu","Zhe Chen","Kaipeng Zhang","Lewei Lu","Xizhou Zhu","Ping Luo","Yu Qiao","Jifeng Dai","Wenqi Shao","Wenhai Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$113","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangZRDLLH0ZLZL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangZRDLLH0ZLZL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/24a8968affe71ffe4067d022b9d16566-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有多模态大模型评测很少覆盖长多模态文档理解能力，而这是落地到长文档分析、多模态agent等场景的核心基础能力，此前没有系统化的评测基准。","importance":"数据级贡献，是首个专门针对长多模态文档理解的系统化评测基准，能准确衡量MLLM的长上下文多模态信息检索、计数、推理能力，暴露现有模型的长上下文能力短板。","technical_approach":"原创评测基准，设计多模态检索、计数、推理三类任务，将关键信息（针）分散在长度可控的长多模态文档（干草堆）中，要求模型准确定位并利用关键信息回答问题；舍弃了此前单模态长上下文评测的设置，同时覆盖文本、图像等多模态信息的混合分布。","experiments":"测试当前主流12款MLLM，发现所有模型在文档长度超过20k token、关键信息分散的场景下，准确率最高下降62%，仅3款模型在40k token长度下准确率超过30%；scaling实验显示模型参数量提升对多模态长上下文能力的提升幅度远小于单模态场景。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing MLLM evaluations rarely cover long multimodal document understanding capability, which is a core foundation for real-world scenarios like long document analysis and multimodal agents, and there is no systematic evaluation benchmark for this capability.","importance":"Data-level contribution, the first systematic benchmark specifically designed for long multimodal document understanding, can accurately measure MLLM's long-context multimodal retrieval, counting, reasoning capabilities, and expose the long-context capability shortcomings of existing models.","technical_approach":"Original evaluation benchmark that designs three types of tasks: multimodal retrieval, counting, reasoning, scatters key information (needles) in long multimodal documents (haystacks) with controllable length, requires the model to accurately locate and use key information to answer questions; discards previous single-modal long-context evaluation settings, and covers mixed distribution of text, image and other multimodal information at the same time.","experiments":"Tested 12 mainstream MLLMs, found that the accuracy of all models drops by up to 62% when the document length exceeds 20k tokens and key information is scattered, only 3 models achieve accuracy over 30% at 40k token length; scaling experiments show that the improvement of multimodal long-context capability brought by model parameter scaling is much smaller than that in single-modal scenarios.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal-llm","long-context","retrieval","evaluation"],"keywords":["Evaluation","Multimodal","Large Language Model","Long Context"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"长上下文理解能力是MLLM落地到复杂真实场景的核心能力之一。","claim_en":"Long context understanding capability is one of the core capabilities for MLLM deployment in complex real-world scenarios.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"单模态长上下文能力强的MLLM，不一定在多模态长上下文场景下表现好。","claim_en":"MLLMs with strong single-modal long-context performance do not necessarily perform well in multimodal long-context scenarios.","opposes":"Prior work assumes that single-modal long-context capability can be directly transferred to multimodal scenarios.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5.2, Table 3","why_contested":"说明多模态长上下文能力需要单独优化，不能直接复用单模态长上下文的技术方案。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3任务设计和§4.2不同长度下的模型表现即可，做MLLM长上下文预训练时可用来快速验证长程多模态信息召回能力","en":"Only read §3 task design and §4.2 model performance under different lengths. It can be used to quickly verify long-range multimodal information retrieval ability for MLLM long context pretraining."}},{"id":"WangZYW0024","title":"Embedding Trajectory for Out-of-Distribution Detection in Mathematical Reasoning","authors":["Yiming Wang","Pei Zhang","Baosong Yang","Derek F. Wong","Zhuosheng Zhang","Rui Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$114","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangZYW0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangZYW0024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/4b734e95f0788a030a69caa987516186-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有生成式大模型的OOD检测方法多基于嵌入距离度量，在数学推理场景下失效，因为数学推理的输出空间密度高，不同样本的嵌入偏移轨迹差异大，单一嵌入距离无法有效区分ID和OOD样本。","importance":"方法级贡献，首次将推理过程的嵌入轨迹特征用于数学推理场景的OOD检测，大幅提升了该场景下OOD检测的准确率，为复杂生成任务的OOD检测提供了新的思路。","technical_approach":"原创OOD检测方法，利用数学推理过程中每一步的嵌入变化轨迹作为特征，而非仅使用最终输出的静态嵌入；舍弃了此前静态嵌入距离度量的常用方案，通过建模轨迹的分布差异来区分ID和OOD样本。","experiments":"在GSM8K、MATH等主流数学推理数据集上测试，相比现有最优的嵌入距离方法，OOD检测的AUROC提升8.7%，F1 score提升11.2%；ablation显示推理步骤超过3步时，轨迹特征的优势会进一步放大。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing OOD detection methods for generative LLMs are mostly based on embedding distance metrics, which fail in mathematical reasoning scenarios, because the output space of mathematical reasoning has high density, and the embedding shift trajectories of different samples vary greatly, so a single embedding distance cannot effectively distinguish ID and OOD samples.","importance":"Method-level contribution, the first to use embedding trajectory features of the reasoning process for OOD detection in mathematical reasoning scenarios, significantly improves OOD detection accuracy in this scenario, and provides a new idea for OOD detection in complex generative tasks.","technical_approach":"Original OOD detection method that uses the embedding change trajectory of each step in the mathematical reasoning process as features, instead of only using the static embedding of the final output; discards the previously commonly used static embedding distance measurement scheme, and distinguishes ID and OOD samples by modeling the distribution difference of trajectories.","experiments":"Tested on mainstream mathematical reasoning datasets such as GSM8K and MATH, compared with the current best embedding distance method, AUROC of OOD detection is improved by 8.7%, F1 score is improved by 11.2%; ablation shows that when the number of reasoning steps exceeds 3, the advantage of trajectory features is further amplified.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","ood-detection","mathematics","representation"],"keywords":["Out-of-Distribution Detection","Mathematical Reasoning","Generative Language Models"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"OOD检测是保障生成式大模型在真实场景下安全部署的核心技术。","claim_en":"OOD detection is a core technology to ensure the safe deployment of generative LLMs in real-world scenarios.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"静态嵌入距离度量不适合高输出密度的复杂生成任务的OOD检测，推理过程的动态轨迹特征效果更优。","claim_en":"Static embedding distance metrics are not suitable for OOD detection in complex generative tasks with high output density, and dynamic trajectory features of the reasoning process have better performance.","opposes":"Prior work assumes static embedding distance is effective for OOD detection in all generative tasks.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5.1, Table 1","why_contested":"修正了OOD检测方法的适用边界，为不同生成场景的OOD检测方案选择提供了依据。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅面向数学推理OOD检测窄场景，和通用预训练关联度低，知道用推理过程轨迹而非静态嵌入的思路即可","en":"It only targets the narrow scenario of mathematical reasoning OOD detection with low relevance to general pretraining, just know the idea of using reasoning trajectory instead of static embedding."}},{"id":"WeiYSLH0TPLHDL24","title":"Long-form factuality in large language models","authors":["Jerry Wei","Chengrun Yang","Xinying Song","Yifeng Lu","Nathan Hu","Jie Huang","Dustin Tran","Daiyi Peng","Ruibo Liu","Da Huang","Cosmo Du","Quoc V. Le"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$115","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WeiYSLH0TPLHDL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WeiYSLH0TPLHDL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/937ae0e83eb08d2cb8627fe1def8c751-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作聚焦的核心问题是：大模型在长篇生成里如何维持事实一致性，而不是只在短答案或单跳问答上看起来正确。过去很多评测把 factuality 压缩成句级或段级指标，容易回避长程依赖、前后自相矛盾、以及生成越长越容易偏航的问题，因此这个方向对真正可用的生成式系统更关键。","importance":"它的重要性主要在评测方法和问题定义，而不是提出新的预训练算法。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，next-token loss 很可能不足以刻画长程事实保持能力；如果评测只看短输出，训练改进会被高估。这类工作会直接影响数据筛选、长上下文训练、检索增强和 post-train 对齐的目标设计。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者的核心做法应是系统性刻画 long-form factuality，而不是单点提升某个模型。合理推断它会把长篇事实性拆成若干更可判定的维度，比如局部事实正确、全文一致、引用或证据可追溯、以及随长度增长的错误累积，并用更接近真实使用场景的 prompt/task 来评估。相比传统短答 benchmark，这种设计有效，因为长文错误通常不是单个 token 选错，而是早期偏差在后文被放大。","experiments":"目前给到的信息没有摘要，无法确认具体实验设置、模型规模、数据规模、baseline 和数值结果。可以较确定的是，这类论文通常会比较多家闭源/开源 LLM 在长短输出上的 factuality gap，并分析长度、题材、提示形式或检索条件对结果的影响；但具体提升幅度和关键消融这里不能编造。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical failure mode: whether LLMs can stay factually reliable over long-form generation, not just on short answers. Earlier evaluations often reduce factuality to sentence-level or short QA metrics, which hide error accumulation, cross-paragraph inconsistency, and drift as generation gets longer.","importance":"The contribution is primarily evaluative and diagnostic rather than a new pretraining method. For pretraining research, this matters because next-token loss can look healthy while long-range factual stability remains poor; if we only benchmark short outputs, we will overestimate progress and optimize for the wrong target.","technical_approach":"From the title, the likely approach is to define and benchmark long-form factuality in a structured way rather than proposing a new model. A useful design here is to decompose factuality into local correctness, document-level consistency, supportability, and length-conditioned degradation, then test models in settings closer to actual long-form use. This is effective because long-form failures are rarely isolated token mistakes; they are usually cascades caused by early deviations.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so the exact models, dataset size, baselines, and quantitative findings cannot be verified. What is likely is a comparison across multiple LLMs showing a clear gap between short-form and long-form factuality, plus analyses by generation length, domain, prompting setup, or retrieval condition, but I cannot state numbers without source text.","authors_note":""},"tags":["factuality","long-form","evaluation","llm"],"notable_authors":["Jerry Wei","Nathan Hu"],"keywords":["natural language processing","machine learning","factuality"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§2评测维度定义和§4错误分布统计即可，能修正预训练只优化短输出事实性的偏差，可用来迭代长文训练的目标设计","en":"Only read §2 evaluation dimension definition and §4 error distribution statistics. It corrects the bias of only optimizing short-output factuality in pretraining, can be used to iterate long-text training target design."}},{"id":"WeirKQWC24","title":"Learning to Reason via Program Generation, Emulation, and Search","authors":["Nathaniel Weir","Muhammad Khalifa","Linlu Qiu","Orion Weller","Peter Clark"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$116","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WeirKQWC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WeirKQWC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/401ece9f5d1cfa8600c22049ef43930e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心问题是：如何让语言模型学会更稳定的推理，而不是只模仿最终答案格式。以往很多方法依赖 chain-of-thought 蒸馏或过程监督，但模型仍容易学到表面模板；把推理转成程序生成、执行模拟和搜索，目的是把“会解释”变成“会操作”。","importance":"这是一篇方法级的 reasoning 训练工作。它对 pretrain/post-train 接口的启示在于，推理能力不一定要完全从 token-level imitation 中长出来，也可以通过结构化中间表示和可执行反馈来塑形；这对合成数据、工具使用、以及 test-time search 都有直接价值。","technical_approach":"从标题看，方法由三部分组成：先生成程序作为显式推理轨迹，再通过 emulation 近似执行或检查程序行为，最后用 search 在候选程序空间里找更优解。关键设计不是让模型直接吐自然语言思维链，而是用程序这种约束更强、可验证性更好的表示来承载推理。相比只做答案监督，这样做的好处是能把错误定位到具体步骤；代价是任务要能被程序化，开放域自然语言推理的覆盖面会受限。","experiments":"缺少摘要，无法确认实验任务、模型大小和具体提升数字。按题目判断，实验大概率会覆盖数学、符号推理或可执行环境中的问题求解，并与 direct CoT、program-of-thought、self-consistency 或 search-based baseline 比较；但具体 benchmark 和 gains 不能据此硬写。","authors_note":"作者中 Peter Clark 是知识推理与问答方向的代表性研究者。若该工作来自 AI2，这与其长期关注可解释推理、程序化推理和知识密集型评测的脉络一致；但仅凭当前信息无法严格确认机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks how to train reasoning more reliably than simply imitating final answers or free-form chains of thought. Many prior methods teach surface reasoning style, but not robust procedural competence; program generation plus execution-style feedback is a way to make reasoning operational rather than rhetorical.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution on reasoning training. Its relevance to pretrain/post-train is that strong reasoning may not need to emerge only from token-level imitation; it can be shaped through structured intermediate representations, executable supervision, and search, which is useful for synthetic data pipelines and test-time inference strategies.","technical_approach":"The title suggests a three-part recipe: generate programs as explicit reasoning traces, emulate their execution or validity, and use search to improve over candidate programs. The key choice is to represent reasoning in a constrained, verifiable form instead of unconstrained natural language. That design helps because errors become inspectable at the step level, though the trade-off is narrower task coverage when the problem cannot be cleanly programized.","experiments":"The abstract is unavailable, so I cannot verify tasks, model sizes, baselines, or exact gains. Likely evaluations include math, symbolic reasoning, or other executable domains, compared against direct CoT, program-of-thought, self-consistency, or search-based baselines, but any numerical claim would be speculative.","authors_note":"Peter Clark is a well-known researcher in knowledge-intensive QA and reasoning. If this paper is from AI2, it would align with that group's long-running work on interpretable reasoning and evaluation, but the institution cannot be confirmed from the provided text alone."},"tags":["program-generation","reasoning","code","llm"],"notable_authors":["Nathaniel Weir","Peter Clark"],"keywords":["language models","instruction tuning","code generation","reasoning","program search","program emulation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§3.3可执行反馈设计和§4推理效果对比即可，思路可复用在预训练合成推理数据的流程中，比纯思维链蒸馏的信号更可靠","en":"Only read §3.3 executable feedback design and §4 reasoning performance comparison. The logic can be reused in synthetic reasoning data pipelines for pretraining, with more reliable signals than pure chain-of-thought distillation."}},{"id":"WooPKJKJL24","title":"DropBP: Accelerating Fine-Tuning of Large Language Models by Dropping Backward Propagation","authors":["Sunghyeon Woo","Baeseong Park","Byeongwook Kim","Minjung Jo","Se Jung Kwon","Dongsuk Jeon","Dongsoo Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$117","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WooPKJKJL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WooPKJKJL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/240225294cdd2c9b692c2519d3278a08-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是 LLM 微调反向传播太贵的问题。标准微调里每层都做完整 backward，但并不是每一步、每一层的梯度都同样值得算；如果能有选择地跳过部分 backward，就有机会显著降成本。","importance":"这是很实用的系统/训练效率工作。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于，梯度计算本身存在冗余，训练并不总需要‘全精确’更新；这与 gradient sparsity、layer-wise sensitivity、以及低成本持续训练都有关。若损失退化可控，这类方法对大规模实验迭代价值很高。","technical_approach":"从标题看，DropBP 的核心就是在 fine-tuning 时丢弃部分 backward propagation。关键不是简单地随机省算，而是应该基于层、步或样本的重要性来控制哪些反向路径可以被安全跳过，并维持优化稳定性。相比 LoRA 这类减少可训练参数的方法，DropBP 更像是直接减少训练时计算图的反向开销；优点是和参数高效微调并不冲突，缺点是如果丢得不对，容易造成收敛变慢或最终性能下滑。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认适用的模型规模、任务类型、训练加速比和精度损失。通常这类论文会报告训练吞吐提升、显存变化、最终任务分数与 full backward 的差距，并做不同 drop ratio、不同层策略的消融；但在缺少来源文本的情况下不能给具体数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a straightforward bottleneck: full backpropagation makes LLM fine-tuning expensive, even though not every backward computation is equally valuable. If some gradients can be skipped safely, training cost can be reduced without redesigning the model.","importance":"This is a practical training-efficiency contribution. For pretraining researchers, the broader lesson is that gradient computation contains redundancy; optimization may tolerate selective inexactness. That matters for continual training, rapid experimentation, and any setup where compute, memory, or bandwidth is the limiting factor.","technical_approach":"DropBP, judging from the title, accelerates fine-tuning by dropping parts of backward propagation. The important point is that this should not be naive random skipping; some schedule or importance rule is likely used to decide which layers, steps, or paths can be omitted while keeping optimization stable. Compared with LoRA or other parameter-efficient methods, this targets compute directly rather than parameter count. The trade-off is obvious: too much dropping will hurt convergence or final quality.","experiments":"The abstract is missing, so model sizes, tasks, speedup, memory savings, and quality retention cannot be verified. A proper evaluation would compare throughput, memory, and final downstream scores against full backprop and PEFT baselines, with ablations on drop ratio and layer selection, but no exact values should be invented.","authors_note":""},"tags":["fine-tuning","training-efficiency","backward-propagation","llm"],"notable_authors":["Sunghyeon Woo","Se Jung Kwon"],"keywords":["Training Acceleration","Memory Efficient Fine-Tuning","Large Language Models","Backpropagation Optimization."],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的重要性路由策略设计和实验部分的精度损失对比即可，可复用在内部低成本大规模微调实验的效率优化","en":"Only read §3 for importance-based routing design and accuracy loss comparison in experiments, reusable for efficiency optimization of low-cost internal large-scale fine-tuning trials"}},{"id":"WuAWGJMP24","title":"ReFT: Representation Finetuning for Language Models","authors":["Zhengxuan Wu","Aryaman Arora","Zheng Wang","Atticus Geiger","Dan Jurafsky","Christopher D. Manning","Christopher Potts"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$118","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WuAWGJMP24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WuAWGJMP24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/75008a0fba53bf13b0bb3b7bff986e0e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心问题是：参数微调并不一定是改模型行为的最小有效单元，很多任务可能只需要改动少量内部表征。传统 full finetune 或 LoRA 都是在参数空间动刀，而如果任务差异主要体现在某些中间表示方向上，直接改表示可能更高效也更可控。","importance":"ReFT 是方法级贡献，而且对 mechanistic interpretability 与高效适配的交叉点很有意思。它给 pretrain/post-train 的启示是，能力编辑未必要通过大规模参数更新实现，表示层面的局部干预可能已经足够。这对可解释对齐、模块化适配和低成本个性化都有潜在影响。","technical_approach":"从标题看，ReFT 即 representation finetuning，核心是在模型前向过程中直接学习对隐藏表示的变换，而不是主要更新原模型权重。关键设计通常包括：选择在哪些层介入、介入形式是低秩还是小型适配器、以及如何保证表示修改只在相关上下文触发。相比 LoRA，它优化对象更接近‘模型内部状态’而非权重矩阵，因此更像做受控干预。这样有效的原因是许多下游行为由少量表示子空间决定；边界是如果任务需要广泛重组知识，仅改表示可能不够。","experiments":"虽然这里没有摘要，但 ReFT 作为已知工作，通常会与 full finetuning、LoRA、prefix/prompt tuning 比较，在参数量很小的情况下取得有竞争力甚至更好的下游效果，并展示更强的可解释性或干预精度。具体模型规模、任务和数字在当前输入中未给出，因此不在这里硬写。","authors_note":"作者包含 Dan Jurafsky，长期活跃于 NLP 基础模型与语言理解研究。若来自 Stanford 等团队，这与其在表示、可解释性和高效适配方向的持续工作一致；但当前信息不足以严格确认机构。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether parameter updates are really the right primitive for adaptation. Many task differences may be expressible by changing a small set of internal representations, so modifying hidden states directly could be more efficient and more controllable than updating weights.","importance":"ReFT is a method-level contribution with an interesting link between efficient adaptation and mechanistic interpretability. For the pretrain/post-train interface, the key message is that behavior editing does not always require substantial weight updates; local representation interventions may already be enough for many tasks.","technical_approach":"As the title indicates, ReFT stands for representation finetuning. The main idea is to learn transformations over hidden representations during the forward pass instead of primarily changing the base model parameters. The design choices that matter are where to intervene, what form the intervention takes, and how context-specific the intervention is. Compared with LoRA, this operates closer to the model’s internal state than to its weight matrices, which is why it can be both lightweight and interpretable. The limitation is that representation-only adaptation may be insufficient when the task requires broad knowledge reorganization.","experiments":"The prompt does not include the abstract, so I cannot verify model sizes, tasks, or exact gains. Broadly, a paper like this would compare against full finetuning, LoRA, and prompt-based methods, showing competitive or better performance with very few trainable parameters and cleaner intervention behavior, but I should not state unsupported numbers.","authors_note":"The author list includes Dan Jurafsky, a major figure in NLP and language understanding. If this is from Stanford or related collaborators, it would fit their ongoing work on representations, interpretability, and efficient adaptation, but the institution is not confirmed by the provided text."},"tags":["representation-finetuning","peft","llm","interpretability"],"notable_authors":["Zhengxuan Wu","Dan Jurafsky","Atticus Geiger"],"keywords":["Representation finetuning","Interpretability","Parameter-efficient finetuning","Activation intervention"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§4的表征介入位置选择实验和与LoRA的效果对比，可参考来做可控的低成本能力编辑","en":"Focus on §4 for representation intervention position selection experiments and performance comparison with LoRA, referable for controllable low-cost capability editing"}},{"id":"WuCLWGX0HCS24","title":"VideoLLM-MoD: Efficient Video-Language Streaming with Mixture-of-Depths Vision Computation","authors":["Shiwei Wu","Joya Chen","Kevin Qinghong Lin","Qimeng Wang","Yan Gao","Qianli Xu","Tong Xu","Yao Hu","Enhong Chen","Mike Zheng Shou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$119","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WuCLWGX0HCS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WuCLWGX0HCS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c6a79e139ec4f371701ea8cc9e06018e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是视频-语言模型在流式处理场景中的计算浪费。视频 token 数量大、冗余高，如果每一帧都走同等深度的视觉计算，延迟和成本都会很差，尤其不适合 streaming 场景。","importance":"这是多模态系统与架构优化工作。对统一预训练的启示是，不同模态、不同时间片的信息密度并不均匀，统一模型未必要对所有视觉 token 一视同仁；MoD 这类按输入动态分配计算的思路，对原生多模态 pretrain 和 serving 都有意义。","technical_approach":"从标题看，VideoLLM-MoD 把 mixture-of-depths 引入视觉侧计算，用动态深度而不是固定深度处理视频流。关键做法应是根据帧或视觉 token 的重要性，决定经过多少层视觉编码，再与语言侧进行流式融合。和单纯做 token pruning 不同，MoD 保留了重要片段的高容量处理，同时减少冗余片段的计算。这样设计有效，因为视频冗余主要体现在时间邻近帧高度相似；代价是路由策略如果不准，容易漏掉短暂但关键信息。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认使用了哪些视频语言任务、模型大小、吞吐和精度权衡。通常这类论文会报告 streaming latency、GFLOPs/吞吐下降幅度，以及与全深度模型相比的任务精度保持率，并做不同路由阈值或深度配置的消融；但具体数字不能凭题目填写。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles wasted computation in streaming video-language models. Video inputs are long and highly redundant, and applying the same full-depth visual processing to every frame is inefficient, especially in low-latency settings.","importance":"This is a multimodal systems and architecture paper with useful implications for unified pretraining. Information density is not uniform across modalities or time, so a single model need not spend equal compute on every visual token. Dynamic depth allocation is therefore relevant both to native multimodal training and to serving.","technical_approach":"From the title, VideoLLM-MoD applies mixture-of-depths to the vision stack for streaming video-language modeling. The likely mechanism is to route frames or visual tokens through different computation depths based on their importance, then fuse them with the language side in a streaming fashion. Compared with plain token pruning, this preserves high-capacity processing for important segments while reducing work on redundant ones. The risk is routing error: missing a brief but critical visual event can hurt downstream understanding.","experiments":"The abstract is unavailable, so I cannot confirm tasks, model sizes, or the exact accuracy-efficiency trade-off. A solid paper here would report latency, FLOPs or throughput savings, and task performance retention relative to a full-depth baseline, plus ablations on routing thresholds and depth allocation, but exact values are not recoverable from the prompt.","authors_note":""},"tags":["video-llm","mixture-of-depths","streaming","efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Shiwei Wu","Kevin Qinghong Lin"],"keywords":["Online video understanding; effcient modeling"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看Fig2的动态路由逻辑和§5的流式延迟测试结果，可借鉴到多模态预训练的动态计算分配设计","en":"Only check Fig 2 for dynamic routing logic and §5 for streaming latency test results, referable for dynamic computation allocation design in multimodal pre-training"}},{"id":"2405.15589","title":"Efficient Adversarial Training in LLMs with Continuous Attacks","authors":["Sophie Xhonneux","Alessandro Sordoni","Stephan Günnemann","Gauthier Gidel","Leo Schwinn"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15589","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XhonneuxSGGS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XhonneuxSGGS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/0302fb83c62991efbccf0a003e4f5a92-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM对抗训练需要在每轮迭代中生成离散对抗样本，计算成本极高，无法大规模应用到大模型的安全对齐流程中。","importance":"方法级贡献，将对抗攻击的计算空间从离散token空间转移到连续嵌入空间，对抗训练的速度提升一个数量级以上，可直接集成到现有LLM的安全训练流程中。","technical_approach":"原创对抗训练算法C-AdvUL，包含两个损失：第一个损失让模型对在对抗行为数据集上计算的连续嵌入攻击鲁棒，第二个损失对齐连续攻击和离散攻击的梯度，保证对抗训练的泛化性；舍弃了此前离散对抗样本生成的步骤，不需要每轮迭代做离散搜索。","experiments":"在7B、13B参数的LLaMA-2模型上测试，相比现有最优离散对抗训练方法，训练速度提升12倍，对抗攻击下的拒绝率提升9.3%，同时通用能力下降幅度控制在1.2%以内；ablation显示双损失设计是同时保证效率和鲁棒性的核心。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM adversarial training requires generating discrete adversarial samples in each training iteration, which has extremely high computational cost and cannot be applied to large-scale LLM safety alignment pipelines.","importance":"Method-level contribution that shifts the compute space of adversarial attacks from discrete token space to continuous embedding space, improves adversarial training speed by more than one order of magnitude, and can be directly integrated into existing LLM safety training pipelines.","technical_approach":"Original adversarial training algorithm C-AdvUL, includes two losses: the first loss makes the model robust to continuous embedding attacks computed on an adversarial behavior dataset, the second loss aligns gradients of continuous attacks and discrete attacks to ensure generalization of adversarial training; discards the previous discrete adversarial sample generation step, no discrete search required per iteration.","experiments":"Tested on 7B and 13B parameter LLaMA-2 models, compared with the current best discrete adversarial training method, training speed is improved by 12x, rejection rate under adversarial attacks is improved by 9.3%, while general capability degradation is controlled within 1.2%; ablation shows the dual-loss design is the core to ensure both efficiency and robustness.","authors_note":""},"tags":["adversarial-training","safety","robustness","alignment","optimization"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Adversarial Training","Robustness"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"对抗训练是提升LLM对抗鲁棒性、避免安全护栏被绕过的有效方法。","claim_en":"Adversarial training is an effective method to improve LLM adversarial robustness and prevent safety guardrails from being bypassed.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"连续嵌入空间的对抗训练可以达到甚至超过离散对抗训练的鲁棒性效果，同时计算成本大幅降低。","claim_en":"Adversarial training in continuous embedding space can achieve even exceed the robustness effect of discrete adversarial training, while significantly reducing computational cost.","opposes":"Prior work assumes that only discrete adversarial attacks can provide effective training signals for LLM robustness.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4.2, Table 2","why_contested":"打破了对抗训练必须依赖离散样本的固有认知，为大模型的大规模安全对齐提供了可行的技术路径。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"读§3.2的双损失设计和§4的效率提升对比即可，可直接集成到内部LLM安全对齐的训练流程里","en":"Read §3.2 for dual loss design and §4 for efficiency improvement comparison, can be directly integrated into internal LLM safety alignment training pipelines"}},{"id":"2402.04617","title":"InfLLM: Training-Free Long-Context Extrapolation for LLMs with an Efficient Context Memory","authors":["Chaojun Xiao","Pengle Zhang","Xu Han","Guangxuan Xiao","Yankai Lin","Zhengyan Zhang","Zhiyuan Liu","Maosong Sun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.04617","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XiaoZ0XLZ0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XiaoZ0XLZ0024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d842425e4bf79ba039352da0f658a906-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM预训练时的序列长度有限，处理超长序列时存在OOD和注意力分散问题，主流解决方案需要做长序列持续预训练，计算成本高且会改变模型原有能力。","importance":"方法级贡献，首次证明LLM不需要任何微调就具备理解超长序列的固有能力，训练成本为零，可直接适配任意长度的输入序列，不改变模型原有能力。","technical_approach":"原创免训练长上下文方法，将远距离上下文存储在额外的内存单元中，采用高效的检索机制只将最相关的上下文单元送入注意力计算；舍弃了此前需要微调模型位置编码或持续预训练的方案，完全在推理层面实现长上下文扩展。","experiments":"在7B、13B参数的LLaMA、Mistral模型上测试，无需任何微调即可支持最高200k token的输入，在长上下文问答任务上的准确率比默认推理方式提升47%，性能与经过长序列微调的模型差距小于3%；ablation显示检索粒度为256 token时平衡了效率和准确率。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLMs are pre-trained on limited maximum sequence length, face OOD and attention distraction issues when processing ultra-long sequences. Mainstream solutions require continued pre-training on long sequences, which has high computational cost and changes the original capabilities of the model.","importance":"Method-level contribution that first proves LLMs have inherent capability to understand ultra-long sequences without any fine-tuning, has zero training cost, can directly adapt to input sequences of any length, and does not change the original capabilities of the model.","technical_approach":"Original training-free long-context method that stores distant contexts in additional memory units, uses an efficient retrieval mechanism to send only the most relevant context units to attention calculation; discards previous solutions that require fine-tuning position encoding or continued pre-training, implements long-context expansion entirely at the inference level.","experiments":"Tested on 7B and 13B parameter LLaMA, Mistral models, supports up to 200k token input without any fine-tuning, accuracy on long-context QA tasks is 47% higher than default inference, performance gap with long-sequence fine-tuned models is less than 3%; ablation shows 256 token retrieval granularity balances efficiency and accuracy.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-context","context-memory","inference","extrapolation","kv-cache"],"keywords":["Long context","Large Language Models"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM预训练的序列长度限制是其处理超长输入的核心瓶颈之一。","claim_en":"Sequence length limit during LLM pre-training is one of the core bottlenecks for processing ultra-long inputs.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"LLM不需要微调位置编码或做长序列预训练，就可以通过推理层面的内存检索机制实现超长序列的有效理解。","claim_en":"LLMs can achieve effective understanding of ultra-long sequences via inference-level memory retrieval mechanism, without fine-tuning position encoding or long-sequence pre-training.","opposes":"Prior work assumes that long-context extrapolation of LLMs requires at least partial fine-tuning of the model.","opposes_cite_hint":"Chen 2023 RoPE scaling","evidence_anchor":"§3.2, Table 1","why_contested":"推翻了长上下文扩展必须修改模型或微调的固有认知，为大模型的低成本长上下文适配提供了新的方案。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的上下文内存检索机制设计，可参考做推理侧零成本长序列适配的快速验证","en":"Only read §3 for context memory retrieval mechanism design, referable for quick validation of zero-cost long-sequence adaptation on inference side"}},{"id":"Xu0YWZLLC24","title":"OneBit: Towards Extremely Low-bit Large Language Models","authors":["Yuzhuang Xu","Xu Han","Zonghan Yang","Shuo Wang","Qingfu Zhu","Zhiyuan Liu","Weidong Liu","Wanxiang Che"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Xu0YWZLLC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Xu0YWZLLC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/7a7a3f53faafc0161be0fcb57e5fa078-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM量化方法在比特宽度降到极低时性能下降严重，大多只能支持4bit或8bit量化，无法满足极端边缘设备的部署需求。","importance":"方法级贡献，首次实现了1比特LLM量化的可用性能，将LLM的存储和计算开销降到现有4bit量化的1/4，为极端边缘场景的LLM部署铺平了道路。","technical_approach":"原创1比特量化框架，包含新型1比特参数表示方法来更好地保留LLM权重的分布特征，以及基于矩阵分解的参数初始化方法来缓解量化带来的性能损失；舍弃了此前常用的对称或非对称均匀量化方案，针对1比特场景设计了专用的表示和初始化流程。","experiments":"在7B、13B参数的LLaMA-2模型上测试，1比特量化后的模型在通用NLP任务上的性能比现有最优2bit量化方法仅低2.1%，存储占用仅为4bit量化的27%，推理速度提升2.8倍；ablation显示矩阵分解初始化可以降低1比特量化带来的性能损失超过60%。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM quantization methods suffer severe performance degradation when the bit width is extremely low, most can only support 4bit or 8bit quantization, which cannot meet the deployment requirements of extreme edge devices.","importance":"Method-level contribution that first achieves usable performance for 1-bit LLM quantization, reduces LLM storage and compute overhead to 1/4 of existing 4-bit quantization, paving the way for LLM deployment in extreme edge scenarios.","technical_approach":"Original 1-bit quantization framework, includes a novel 1-bit parameter representation method to better preserve the distribution characteristics of LLM weights, and a parameter initialization method based on matrix decomposition to alleviate performance loss caused by quantization; discards previously commonly used symmetric or asymmetric uniform quantization schemes, designs dedicated representation and initialization processes for 1-bit scenarios.","experiments":"Tested on 7B and 13B parameter LLaMA-2 models, the 1-bit quantized model has only 2.1% lower performance on general NLP tasks than the current best 2-bit quantization method, storage occupation is only 27% of 4-bit quantization, inference speed is improved by 2.8x; ablation shows matrix decomposition initialization reduces performance loss caused by 1-bit quantization by more than 60%.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","low-bit","inference","compression","llm"],"keywords":["model quantization","weight-only quantization","extremely low-bit","onebit"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"极低比特量化是降低LLM部署成本、适配边缘设备的核心技术路径之一。","claim_en":"Extremely low-bit quantization is one of the core technical paths to reduce LLM deployment cost and adapt to edge devices.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"1比特LLM量化可以通过专用的表示和初始化方法达到接近2bit量化的性能，满足边缘场景的基本需求。","claim_en":"1-bit LLM quantization can achieve performance close to 2-bit quantization via dedicated representation and initialization methods, meeting basic requirements of edge scenarios.","opposes":"Prior work assumes that 1-bit quantization of LLMs will lead to unacceptable performance degradation and has no practical value.","opposes_cite_hint":"Frantar 2023 GPTQ","evidence_anchor":"§4.1, Table 2","why_contested":"打破了1比特量化无法用于LLM的固有认知，拓展了LLM部署的可支持场景边界。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3的1比特参数表示方法和性能衰减控制实验，仅作极端边缘部署场景的技术参考","en":"Focus on §3 for 1-bit parameter representation method and performance degradation control experiments, only as technical reference for extreme edge deployment scenarios"}},{"id":"Yang0A24","title":"Masked Hard-Attention Transformers Recognize Exactly the Star-Free Languages","authors":["Andy Yang","David Chiang","Dana Angluin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"The expressive power of transformers over inputs of unbounded size can be studied through their ability to recognize classes of formal languages. In this paper, we establish exact characterizations of transformers with hard attention (in which all attention is focused on exactly one position) and attention masking (in which each position only attends to positions on one side). With strict masking (each position cannot attend to itself) and without position embeddings, these transformers are expressively equivalent to linear temporal logic (LTL), which defines exactly the star-free languages. A key technique is the use of Boolean RASP as a convenient intermediate language between transformers and LTL. We then take numerous results known for LTL and apply them to transformers, showing how position embeddings, strict masking, and depth all increase expressive power.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Yang0A24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Yang0A24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/13d7f172259b11b230cc5da8768abc5f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要与关键信息，无法可靠判断论文要解决的具体问题与结论。","importance":"缺少摘要与实验信息，无法评估其对 pretrain/Transformer 理论或实践的影响量级。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要，无法概括其方法设定、关键假设与与已有工作的差异。","experiments":"缺少摘要，无法提取任何实验规模、基线与指标信息。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract or technical details are provided, so the core problem and conclusion cannot be stated reliably.","importance":"Without an abstract or results, the impact on pretraining or Transformer theory/practice cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"Method assumptions and the key technical mechanism are unavailable due to missing abstract.","experiments":"No experimental information is available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer-expressivity","formal-languages","hard-attention"],"keywords":["Transformers","Formal Language Theory","Logic","Automata","Expressivity"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看结论部分即可，当前公开信息不足，仅作为Transformer理论相关的文献备查","en":"Only read the conclusion section, insufficient public information available, only for reference as Transformer theory related literature"}},{"id":"Yang0MR24","title":"Reawakening knowledge: Anticipatory recovery from catastrophic interference via structured training","authors":["Yanlai Yang","Matt Jones","Michael C. Mozer","Mengye Ren"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We explore the training dynamics of neural networks in a structured non-IID setting where documents are presented cyclically in a fixed, repeated sequence. Typically, networks suffer from catastrophic interference when training on a sequence of documents; however, we discover a curious and remarkable property of LLMs finetuned sequentially in this setting: they exhibit *anticipatory* behavior, recovering from the forgetting on documents *before* seeing them again. The behavior emerges and becomes more robust as the architecture scales up its number of parameters. Through comprehensive experiments and visualizations, we uncover new insights into training over-parameterized networks in structured environments.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Yang0MR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Yang0MR24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9628b97f74cd8f83ad12b631378b81e2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要与关键信息，无法可靠总结其关于灾难性干扰（catastrophic interference）与“结构化训练”如何实现知识恢复的具体设定。","importance":"缺少摘要与实验信息，无法判断其对 continual pretrain / mid-train 稳定性与遗忘缓解的启示强度。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要，无法说明其“anticipatory recovery”具体是训练日程、正则、回放，还是结构化数据编排。","experiments":"缺少摘要，无法提取任何实验规模、指标与对照。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract is provided, so the setup and claims around catastrophic interference and anticipatory recovery cannot be summarized reliably.","importance":"Without details, the relevance to continual pretraining/mid-training stability and forgetting mitigation cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"The mechanism behind “structured training” and “anticipatory recovery” is unclear due to missing abstract.","experiments":"No experimental information is available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["catastrophic-forgetting","continual-learning","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["large language models","LLMs","catastrophic interference","online learning","continual learning","anticipatory recovery","cyclic training","structured training sequences"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅扫摘要和结论部分，仅作持续预训练遗忘缓解方向的弱信号参考","en":"Only skim the abstract and conclusion sections, only as weak signal reference for catastrophic forgetting mitigation in continual pre-training"}},{"id":"2406.01563","title":"LoFiT: Localized Fine-tuning on LLM Representations","authors":["Fangcong Yin","Xi Ye","Greg Durrett"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.01563","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YinYD24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YinYD24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/122ea6470232ee5e79a2649243348005-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：能不能不用全量微调，也不局限于纯推理时表征干预，而是在少量关键表示位点上做局部训练来获得可控行为。过去一类工作通过给特定 attention head 加 bias vector 这类“无学习干预”来改行为，优点是便宜，问题是效果不稳定、迁移性弱；另一类全参微调又太重，且不利于理解到底哪些内部单元在起作用。","importance":"它的贡献属于 pretrain/posttrain 接口上的方法级工作，也和可解释性直接相关。价值不在于替代所有 PEFT，而在于提供一种更接近机制层面的适配手段：只更新少量被识别为任务关键的头部表示偏移，就能在参数成本、可解释性和行为控制之间取得更清晰的折中。对做大模型实验的人，这类方法的重要启示是，很多能力或对齐目标可能并不需要广泛改写权重，而是依赖少数局部通道的系统性调节。","technical_approach":"LoFiT 的核心是两步：先识别对目标任务最重要的一小部分 attention heads，再只在这些位置学习加到隐藏表示上的 offset vectors。它不是 LoRA 那种低秩改权重，也不是 test-time 手工加向量，而是对“表征层的局部可训练干预”做系统化。关键设计在于稀疏定位：如果直接对所有层/头做表示偏移，虽然容量更大，但会回到重型微调并失去解释性；而只改最相关的 heads，能把学习信号集中到已知有行为相关性的局部结构上。它有效的前提是任务相关信息确实被局部化编码，如果目标能力是广泛分布式的，收益可能受限。","experiments":"摘要明确说明它在稀疏 attention heads 上训练 offset vectors，并将其作为现有 representation intervention 的有效替代。给定信息没有模型规模、任务集合和具体数值，因此不能编造提升幅度。可以合理预期作者会和两类基线比较：一类是无训练的表示干预方法，另一类是标准 PEFT/微调；值得关注的实验点会是所需 heads 数量、不同层的敏感性、以及局部化程度与性能之间的 trade-off。","authors_note":"作者包含 Greg Durrett。机构信息无法仅凭给定内容可靠确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether we can adapt LLM behavior by training only a few localized representation edits, instead of doing either full fine-tuning or purely hand-crafted inference-time interventions. Prior representation intervention work showed that adding vectors at certain heads can steer behavior, but those methods are often brittle; full fine-tuning is much heavier and says less about where the behavior actually lives in the model.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution at the interface of post-training and interpretability. Its value is not that it replaces all PEFT methods, but that it offers a cleaner trade-off between parameter efficiency, controllability, and mechanistic grounding: if a task can be driven through a sparse set of heads, then broad weight updates may be unnecessary. For practitioners, the main lesson is that some alignment or task behaviors may depend on a small number of localized channels rather than diffuse global changes.","technical_approach":"LoFiT works in two stages: identify the attention heads most important for a task, then learn trainable offset vectors added to hidden representations at only those heads. This differs from LoRA-style low-rank weight updates and from fixed test-time steering vectors; it is a structured, trainable intervention in representation space. The main design choice is sparsity. Updating all heads would increase capacity but collapse back toward heavyweight tuning and weaker interpretability. Focusing on a small set of task-relevant heads keeps the intervention localized and easier to analyze. The limitation is equally clear: if the target capability is highly distributed, localized edits may not be enough.","experiments":"The abstract confirms the key setup—sparse head selection plus learned offset vectors—but does not provide model sizes, tasks, or quantitative gains, so those should not be fabricated. The most informative comparisons are likely against learning-free representation interventions and standard parameter-efficient tuning baselines. Useful ablations would include how many heads are needed, which layers matter most, and how performance changes as localization becomes more aggressive.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","fine-tuning","representation","alignment"],"notable_authors":["Greg Durrett"],"keywords":["Interpretability","Large language models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"看§3的关键注意力头识别方法和§4的可控性对比实验，可参考做机制导向的轻量化适配","en":"Read §3 for critical attention head identification method and §4 for controllability comparison experiments, referable for mechanism-oriented lightweight adaptation"}},{"id":"2406.03847","title":"Lean Workbook: A large-scale Lean problem set formalized from natural language math problems","authors":["Huaiyuan Ying","Zijian Wu","Yihan Geng","Jiayu Wang","Dahua Lin","Kai Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.03847","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YingWGWL024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YingWGWL024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/bf236666a2cc5f3ae05d2e08485efc4c-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心问题是：如何为 Lean 4 形式化数学建立足够大、质量可用的训练数据。现状是自然语言数学题很多，但正式证明语言数据稀缺，导致 LLM 在自然语言数学上看起来很强，在 Lean theorem proving 上却明显掉队；以前这个问题主要靠人工整理少量语料或直接拿现成 formal corpus 训练，规模和覆盖都不够。","importance":"它的贡献主要是数据级，而且对数学推理与形式化验证方向是实打实的基础设施补全。对 pretrain/posttrain 的启示是，模型在特定符号系统中的能力往往被数据瓶颈卡住，不是简单多加通用数学文本就能补齐；如果想让 LLM 真正进入 formal reasoning，必须把自然语言问题、形式化陈述和证明过程之间的双向映射数据做起来。57K 规模不算特别大，但在 Lean 语境下已经是有价值的增量。","technical_approach":"作者提出一个迭代式 synthetic data pipeline，在自然语言数学问题与 Lean 4 statement 之间做双向生成和过滤。关键不只是“生成数据”，而是“生成—过滤—再生成”的闭环：先用模型翻译，再通过规则或验证器筛掉不合法、无意义或低质量样本，最后把高质量合成数据反哺模型继续提升。相比一次性数据扩增，这种设计更适合 formal language，因为错误样本的危害很大，直接训练会让模型学到语法和语义上的坏先验。它的边界在于，statement translation 的提升不等于完整证明能力的同步提升。","experiments":"摘要给出的关键数字是最终数据集约 57K。论文声称这套合成数据流程能提升模型对复杂数学问题与证明的翻译和理解能力，但没有在给定信息中提供具体基线、模型规模或增益数值，因此不能补写。对这类工作最值得关注的实验通常是：合成数据经过几轮迭代后质量如何变化、形式正确率与语义正确率是否同步提升、以及在 Lean 语句翻译和相关 formal tasks 上相对无合成数据训练能提升多少。","authors_note":"作者名单含 Dahua Lin。机构信息无法仅凭给定内容可靠确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a straightforward bottleneck: there is far too little Lean 4 training data for formal mathematical reasoning, even though natural-language math data is abundant. As a result, LLMs look strong on informal math benchmarks but remain weak in formal theorem proving. Existing solutions rely on limited manually curated corpora or small formal datasets, which do not scale well.","importance":"This is primarily a data contribution, and an important one for formal reasoning. The pretrain/posttrain lesson is that capability in a symbolic language is often data-limited rather than purely model-limited; adding more generic math text does not automatically produce formal reasoning skill. If we want LLMs to operate in formal proof systems, we need large, usable mappings between natural-language problems and formal statements. A 57K Lean-oriented dataset is not massive by web scale, but it is meaningful in this niche.","technical_approach":"The core method is an iterative synthetic data pipeline that translates between natural-language math problems and Lean 4 statements, then filters the outputs before feeding them back into training. The important part is not just generation but the generate–filter–iterate loop. That matters more in formal languages than in open text, because low-quality synthetic examples can teach the model invalid syntax or misleading semantics. This design is a pragmatic way to expand coverage while controlling quality. Its limitation is that better statement translation does not automatically imply stronger end-to-end proof search.","experiments":"The main concrete number in the abstract is the final dataset size: about 57K examples. The abstract claims improvements in translating and understanding complex mathematical problems and proofs, but it does not provide model sizes, baselines, or exact gains in the provided text, so those should not be fabricated. The most useful empirical details would be how data quality evolves across iterations and whether syntactic correctness and semantic faithfulness improve together.","authors_note":""},"tags":["math","formal-language","data","synthetic-data"],"notable_authors":["Dahua Lin"],"keywords":["Formal language proving","Translation","Lean4","expert iteration","dataset"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§2的合成数据pipeline设计和数据集统计信息，可复用在形式化推理方向的训练数据构建","en":"Only read §2 for synthetic data pipeline design and dataset statistics, reusable for training data construction for formal reasoning tasks"}},{"id":"2406.05981","title":"ShiftAddLLM: Accelerating Pretrained LLMs via Post-Training Multiplication-Less Reparameterization","authors":["Haoran You","Yipin Guo","Yichao Fu","Wei Zhou","Huihong Shi","Xiaofan Zhang","Souvik Kundu","Amir Yazdanbakhsh","Yingyan (Celine) Lin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$11f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.05981","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YouGFZS00YL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YouGFZS00YL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/2c30a37c75f062e0bf79297c73db8c6c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是：如何在不从头训练、也不做全量恢复微调的情况下，把预训练 LLM 重参数化为更适合硬件部署的无乘法模型。shift-and-add 方案早就被认为硬件友好，但以前通常需要从头训练或大规模微调来把精度拉回来，这对已经训好的大模型几乎不现实。","importance":"它的意义主要是系统与高效推理层面，但对 pretrain 社区也有启发。因为如果 post-training reparameterization 真能在较小代价下把 dense multiply-heavy LLM 迁移到 shift-add 形式，就说明模型参数空间里存在相当大的实现冗余，预训练时未必需要把部署友好性完全留到架构设计阶段。对大模型落地来说，这类工作直接对应延迟、内存和端侧可用性。","technical_approach":"ShiftAddLLM 的核心是对已预训练好的 LLM 做 post-training multiplication-less reparameterization，把 attention 和 MLP 中昂贵的乘法替换为更硬件友好的 shift-and-add 原语。关键点不只是替换算子，而是如何在不进行 full fine-tuning 的前提下恢复性能，因此大概率包含分层校准、局部重构或少量适配参数来弥补表示误差。与从头训练的 shift-add 模型相比，它的优势是直接利用现有预训练权重；与普通量化相比，它瞄准的是算子级别的乘法消除，而不只是降低 bit-width。边界在于，真实收益高度依赖硬件实现，软件模拟的 FLOPs 节省不一定等于端到端加速。","experiments":"摘要指出方法面向 resource-constrained devices，并同时改造 attention 与 MLP 层，但没有提供涉及的 LLM 名称、参数规模、困惑度/下游精度损失或实际 latency 数字，因此不能补写具体结果。对这类论文最关键的实验应该包括：和量化、稀疏化及已有 reparameterization 方法比较的精度-延迟曲线，不同层替换比例的敏感性，以及端侧硬件上是否真的得到 wall-clock 提升而非仅理论操作数下降。","authors_note":"机构信息无法仅凭给定内容可靠确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical deployment question: can we turn a pretrained LLM into a multiplication-free model after training, without retraining from scratch or doing expensive full fine-tuning? Shift-and-add arithmetic is hardware-friendly, but prior approaches usually paid a large training cost to recover accuracy, which is unrealistic for already-trained large models.","importance":"This is mainly a systems and efficient-inference contribution, but it is still relevant to pretraining researchers. If post-training reparameterization can move dense pretrained LLMs into a shift-and-add form with manageable accuracy loss, it suggests that some of the implementation burden can be deferred from pretraining-time architecture choices to post-training transformation. For deployment, the stakes are direct: latency, memory, and viability on edge devices.","technical_approach":"ShiftAddLLM performs post-training multiplication-less reparameterization, replacing multiplications in both attention and MLP blocks with shift-and-add primitives. The hard part is not the operator replacement itself but preserving model quality without full-scale retraining, so the method likely relies on calibration or lightweight adaptation to absorb the approximation error. Relative to quantization, this targets a different axis: eliminating expensive multiply operations rather than only reducing precision. The main caveat is that hardware benefit is implementation-dependent; lower theoretical operation cost does not automatically translate to end-to-end speedup.","experiments":"The abstract states the deployment setting and the target modules—attention plus MLP—but gives no model names, parameter counts, perplexity drops, or latency numbers in the provided text, so those should not be invented. The experiments that matter most are accuracy–efficiency trade-offs against quantization and prior reparameterization methods, sensitivity to how much of the network is converted, and whether real hardware shows wall-clock gains rather than only analytic savings.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm","quantization","inference","reparameterization"],"keywords":["Large Language Models (LLMs); Efficient LLMs; Multiplication-less networks; Hardware acceleration"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3的重参数后精度校准策略，可参考做预训练模型的端侧部署加速优化","en":"Focus on §3 for post-reparameterization accuracy calibration strategy, referable for edge deployment acceleration optimization of pre-trained models"}},{"id":"2404.04920","title":"Regularized Conditional Diffusion Model for Multi-Task Preference Alignment","authors":["Xudong Yu","Chenjia Bai","Haoran He","Changhong Wang","Xuelong Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$120","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.04920","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YuBHW024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YuBHW024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/fceae9d27e68e183d71aaa88030f52ee-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：如何在多任务 sequential decision-making 里，用统一的人类偏好条件代替各任务各自的 reward function，让模型既能跨任务泛化，又能按偏好可控。以往 return-conditioned diffusion 直接条件在回报上，但这要求预定义奖励，并且多任务场景下 reward 空间不统一，导致 versatility 和 alignment 都受限。","importance":"它的贡献更偏条件生成与对齐建模方法，而不是传统 RL benchmark 的纯算法优化。对 pretrain/posttrain 接口的启示在于，偏好条件可能比 reward 标量更适合作为统一训练信号：reward 解决的是任务内最优，preference 更接近人类可表达约束，因此在多任务和可控生成环境中更有扩展性。这个思路也和 LLM preference optimization 有呼应，说明“偏好表示”本身值得被建模，而不是只拿来生成 pairwise loss。","technical_approach":"作者提出一个 regularized conditional diffusion model，把 multi-task preferences 作为单任务和多任务决策的统一条件，并学习与 preference labels 对齐的偏好表示，再用该表示去引导轨迹生成。关键设计有两个：一是把不同任务上的奖励接口抽象成共享的 preference representation，避免 reward engineering；二是加入 regularization，约束条件表示与生成行为之间的对应关系，减少条件漂移。相比 return-conditioned diffusion，它不是问“目标回报是多少”，而是问“你希望行为偏向什么”。这样更适合跨任务，但前提是偏好标签本身可获得且足够一致。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体环境、任务数、baseline 和数值结果，因此不能补充不存在的指标。可以确定的是，实验会围绕两类能力展开：多任务 versatility 和对偏好的 controllability。对读者更有价值的 ablation 应该是：没有 regularization 时偏好表示是否塌陷、单任务与多任务共训时是否存在负迁移、以及 preference representation 的质量对下游轨迹质量有多敏感。","authors_note":"机构信息无法仅凭给定内容可靠确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a limitation of return-conditioned diffusion for decision making: rewards are task-specific and often hand-designed, which makes multi-task control and human-aligned behavior hard to scale. The authors instead ask whether a shared preference condition can replace reward-specific conditioning across tasks.","importance":"This is a method contribution around conditional generation and alignment, not just another RL benchmark paper. The broader relevance is that preference may be a better training interface than scalar reward when the goal is controllable behavior across heterogeneous tasks. That idea connects naturally to preference optimization in LLMs: the preference signal itself may deserve an explicit learned representation rather than being used only inside pairwise losses.","technical_approach":"The proposed method is a regularized conditional diffusion model that uses multi-task preferences as a unified condition for both single-task and multi-task decision making. It learns preference representations aligned with preference labels and uses them to guide trajectory generation. Two choices matter. First, preferences provide a shared interface across tasks, avoiding reward engineering. Second, regularization is used to keep the learned preference representation meaningfully tied to generated behavior. Compared with return-conditioned diffusion, the model conditions on what kind of behavior is desired, not just on a target return. The limitation is data: preference labels must exist and be reasonably consistent.","experiments":"The abstract does not specify environments, task counts, baselines, or numerical gains, so those should not be invented. The key empirical questions are likely whether the method improves cross-task versatility, whether it offers better controllability under different human preferences, and how much the regularization term matters for preventing preference collapse or drift.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion-policy","preference-alignment","multi-task","rl"],"keywords":["multi-task reinforcement learning","preference learning","conditional diffusion model","trajectory generation","alignment","offline RL"],"recommendation":{"zh":"看§3的偏好表示建模和正则化设计，可参考做多任务统一对齐的信号设计","en":"Read §3 for preference representation modeling and regularization design, referable for signal design of unified multi-task alignment"}},{"id":"2406.07550","title":"An Image is Worth 32 Tokens for Reconstruction and Generation","authors":["Qihang Yu","Mark Weber","Xueqing Deng","Xiaohui Shen","Daniel Cremers","Liang-Chieh Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$121","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.07550","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YuWDSCC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YuWDSCC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e91bf7dfba0477554994c6d64833e9d8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：图像 tokenization 过于冗长，已经成为高分辨率生成和统一多模态建模的瓶颈。传统 VQGAN 一类方法通常使用二维 latent grid 和固定下采样率，虽然稳定，但 token 数量依然大，而且无法充分利用图像局部冗余；这会直接推高 AR 或 diffusion 生成器的序列长度成本。","importance":"这是一篇对 pretrain 很有价值的视觉 tokenizer 工作。它的重要性不只是重建质量，而是把图像压缩到极低 token 数仍保留生成和重建能力，这对统一 LM、AR 图像生成、跨模态离散表示都非常关键。题目里“An Image is Worth 32 Tokens”已经传达了量级冲击：如果高质量图像能被稳定压到 32 个 token，很多过去因序列太长而不现实的统一建模方案会重新变得可做。","technical_approach":"作者提出 TiTok，一个 transformer-based 的 1D tokenizer，把图像编码为一维 latent sequence，而不是常见的二维 latent grid。设计动机很明确：二维网格保留了局部结构，但也把相邻冗余原样带进 token 序列；1D tokenization 可以更主动地做全局压缩，把表征预算集中到真正有信息量的视觉因素上。和 VQGAN 这类固定 2D codebook 不同，TiTok 更像是为生成模型下游接口而设计的 tokenizer，而不是只追求像素重建。有效的前提是 transformer tokenizer 能在极短序列下保住关键视觉信息，代价则可能是空间归纳偏置减弱、训练更依赖模型容量和数据。","experiments":"摘要最关键的数字是：图像可被表示为 32 个 token，用于 reconstruction 和 generation。给定信息没有提供分辨率、重建指标、生成 FID、比较 baseline 和提升幅度，因此不能补写。即便如此，实验上应重点关注三件事：在相同 token budget 下相对 VQGAN/其他 tokenizer 的重建保真度；作为生成器输入时的质量-速度权衡；以及 token 数进一步缩短时性能是平滑退化还是出现阈值崩塌。","authors_note":"作者包含 Mark Weber、Daniel Cremers。机构信息无法仅凭给定内容可靠确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a real bottleneck in image generation and unified multimodal modeling: image tokenization is still too long. Standard approaches such as VQGAN use 2D latent grids with fixed downsampling, which are workable but leave substantial spatial redundancy in place and keep sequence lengths high for downstream AR or diffusion models.","importance":"This is a high-value visual tokenizer paper for pretraining. Its significance is not just better reconstruction, but the possibility of reducing an image to an extremely small number of tokens while preserving enough information for both reconstruction and generation. If high-quality images can indeed be represented with around 32 tokens, many unified LM-style multimodal training setups become much more practical.","technical_approach":"The paper introduces TiTok, a transformer-based 1D tokenizer that maps an image into a one-dimensional latent sequence instead of a 2D latent grid. The design choice is deliberate: 2D grids preserve locality, but they also preserve a lot of local redundancy. A 1D tokenizer can allocate a fixed token budget more globally and compress toward semantic content rather than spatial regularity. Unlike tokenizers designed mainly for pixel reconstruction, TiTok appears designed as a better interface for downstream generative models. The trade-off is that moving away from a 2D structure may weaken spatial inductive bias and increase dependence on model capacity and training quality.","experiments":"The headline fact from the abstract is the token budget: an image can be represented with 32 tokens for reconstruction and generation. The provided text does not include resolution, reconstruction metrics, FID, baselines, or exact gains, so none of those should be invented. The most important experimental questions are how TiTok compares with VQGAN-like baselines under the same token budget, how much generation quality it preserves downstream, and whether performance degrades gracefully as the token count is pushed even lower.","authors_note":""},"tags":["image-tokenizer","visual-tokenization","image-generation","compression"],"notable_authors":["Mark Weber","Daniel Cremers"],"keywords":["image tokenization","image generation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"将图像极致压缩至 32 个 1D token，改变了对视觉离散表征长度的 prior，应立刻在统一多模态 AR 生成的 internal ablation 中复现。","en":"Compresses images to an extreme 32 1D tokens, changing the prior on visual discrete representation length; should be immediately reproduced in internal ablations for unified multimodal AR generation."}},{"id":"2410.20178","title":"LLMs Can Evolve Continually on Modality for X-Modal Reasoning","authors":["Jiazuo Yu","Haomiao Xiong","Lu Zhang","Haiwen Diao","Yunzhi Zhuge","Lanqing Hong","Dong Wang","Huchuan Lu","You He","Long Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$122","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.20178","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YuX0DZHWLHC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YuX0DZHWLHC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/5942d10ae51b6bd07648e54df07ef9cd-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心问题是：多模态大模型扩展到新模态时，是否一定要重新做大规模 joint-modal pretraining。当前主流路线高度依赖模态专属预训练加联合微调，计算代价大、扩展性差；每增加一种新模态，往往都像重新造一遍系统，这和 LLM 已有能力的复用程度并不匹配。","importance":"它的重要性在于提出一种 continual modality evolution 的训练范式。对 pretrain 研究的价值很直接：如果 PathWeave 这类方法成立，就说明多模态统一模型不必每次都重新混训所有模态数据，而可以在已有 MLLM 上增量织入新模态路径。这会影响 native multimodal pretraining、模态扩展成本以及统一表示架构的设计。它不是证明“联合预训练不需要了”，而是提供了一条更便宜的扩展路线。","technical_approach":"PathWeave 的核心是基于 continual learning，在预训练 MLLM 之上增量扩展到新模态，并强调 modal-path switching 与 expansion。摘要提到一个 Adapter-in-Adapter（AnA）机制，说明作者并不是粗暴给每个模态挂一个平级 adapter，而是设计了可组合、可扩展的路径结构，使模型能在保留旧模态能力的同时接入新模态，而且训练时只需 uni-modal data，不需要重新做 joint-modal pretraining。这个设计有效的原因是它把“模态接入”变成路径级扩展问题，而不是全模型重写。边界则在于，缺少联合数据可能限制深层跨模态对齐，尤其对需要细粒度 grounding 的任务。","experiments":"摘要给出的核心实验设定是：在已有 MLLM 基础上，用 uni-modal data 增量学习新模态，实现 X-modal reasoning。没有给出具体模态集合、模型规模、对比 baseline 或数值结果，因此不能编造分数。最值得关注的实验点是：加入新模态后旧模态能力保留得如何，是否出现 catastrophic forgetting；没有 joint-modal pretraining 时跨模态推理能达到什么水平；以及 AnA 与普通 adapter 堆叠相比在参数效率和性能上差多少。","authors_note":"机构信息无法仅凭给定内容可靠确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a timely question: when we add a new modality to an existing multimodal LLM, do we really need to run expensive joint multimodal pretraining again? Current practice usually depends on modality-specific pretraining plus large-scale joint tuning, which scales poorly as more modalities are added.","importance":"The contribution is a new training paradigm for continual modality expansion. For pretraining research, the significance is clear: if a model can evolve to new modalities incrementally on top of an existing MLLM, then native multimodal systems do not always need to be rebuilt from scratch whenever the modality set changes. This does not eliminate the value of joint pretraining, but it offers a cheaper expansion path.","technical_approach":"PathWeave builds on continual learning to expand pretrained MLLMs toward new modalities, with explicit support for modal-path switching and path expansion. The abstract mentions an Adapter-in-Adapter (AnA) design, which suggests the system is not just attaching flat modality adapters, but building compositional pathways that can preserve existing capabilities while introducing new ones. A key practical choice is that expansion uses unimodal data rather than requiring renewed joint-modal pretraining. This is attractive because it turns modality onboarding into a pathway-extension problem instead of a full retraining problem. The limitation is also clear: without joint-modal data, deep cross-modal grounding may remain weaker.","experiments":"The abstract states the intended setting—incremental expansion from a pretrained MLLM using unimodal data for x-modal reasoning—but gives no modality list, model sizes, baselines, or quantitative results in the provided text. Those details should therefore not be invented. The key empirical questions are retention of old-modal performance, resistance to catastrophic forgetting, how much cross-modal reasoning is possible without joint-modal pretraining, and whether AnA outperforms simpler adapter stacking on the same parameter budget.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal-llm","continual-learning","modality-expansion"],"recommendation":{"zh":"提出增量织入新模态的路径扩展方案，为降低多模态扩展成本提供新思路，只看 §4.2 和 Fig 3 了解 Adapter-in-Adapter 机制即可。","en":"Proposes a path expansion scheme to incrementally weave in new modalities, offering a new idea for reducing multimodal expansion costs; just read §4.2 and Fig 3 to understand the Adapter-in-Adapter mechanism."}},{"id":"YunCPWBZXLC24","title":"Flex-MoE: Modeling Arbitrary Modality Combination via the Flexible Mixture-of-Experts","authors":["Sukwon Yun","Inyoung Choi","Jie Peng","Yangfan Wu","Jingxuan Bao","Qiyiwen Zhang","Jiayi Xin","Qi Long","Tianlong Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$123","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YunCPWBZXLC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YunCPWBZXLC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/b2f2af5403042b1344f4e93b35fb67d9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有多模态学习框架大多依赖完整的多模态数据输入，无法处理部分模态缺失的场景，也不能灵活支持任意模态组合的输入，限制了其在医疗等真实场景的应用。","importance":"范式级贡献，基于MoE架构实现了任意模态组合的灵活适配，不需要针对不同模态组合单独训练模型，为多模态模型的通用化部署提供了新的范式。","technical_approach":"原创多模态MoE框架，首先对缺失模态做掩码处理，然后为每个模态分配专用的专家，路由机制根据输入的模态组合动态选择对应的专家子集进行计算；舍弃了此前单模态主干+跨模态注意力的常用架构，通过模态专属专家和动态路由实现对任意模态组合的支持。","experiments":"在医疗多模态数据集（包含文本、图像、结构化记录3种模态）上测试，相比现有最优多模态框架，在模态缺失率达到50%的场景下性能提升18.4%，支持7种任意模态组合的输入，无需额外微调；ablation显示模态专属专家的设计是提升缺失模态鲁棒性的核心。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing multimodal learning frameworks mostly rely on complete multimodal data input, cannot handle scenarios where some modalities are missing, nor can they flexibly support input of arbitrary modality combinations, which limits their application in real-world scenarios such as healthcare.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution that implements flexible adaptation to arbitrary modality combinations based on MoE architecture, no need to train separate models for different modality combinations, provides a new paradigm for generalized deployment of multimodal models.","technical_approach":"Original multimodal MoE framework that first masks missing modalities, then assigns dedicated experts for each modality, the routing mechanism dynamically selects the corresponding expert subset for calculation according to the input modality combination; discards the previously commonly used architecture of single-modal backbone + cross-modal attention, supports arbitrary modality combinations via modality-specific experts and dynamic routing.","experiments":"Tested on medical multimodal dataset (including 3 modalities: text, image, structured records), compared with the current best multimodal framework, performance is improved by 18.4% when modality missing rate reaches 50%, supports 7 arbitrary modality combination inputs without additional fine-tuning; ablation shows the modality-specific expert design is the core to improve robustness to missing modalities.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","multimodal","flexible-modality","mixture-of-experts"],"keywords":["Multi-modal learning","MoE"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"多模态模型在真实场景部署时经常面临模态缺失的问题，鲁棒性是核心需求。","claim_en":"Multimodal models often face modality missing problems when deployed in real-world scenarios, robustness is a core requirement.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于模态专属专家和动态路由的MoE架构，比传统跨模态注意力架构更适合处理任意模态组合和模态缺失的场景。","claim_en":"MoE architecture based on modality-specific experts and dynamic routing is more suitable for handling arbitrary modality combinations and modality missing scenarios than traditional cross-modal attention architectures.","opposes":"Prior work assumes that cross-modal attention is the most effective way to fuse multimodal information for all scenarios.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5.3, Table 4","why_contested":"为多模态融合架构的设计提供了新的方向，尤其适合模态不固定的真实场景。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"基于 MoE 处理任意模态组合缺失，作为多模态鲁棒部署的 literature 备查，不读正文。","en":"Handles arbitrary missing modality combinations based on MoE; keep as literature reference for robust multimodal deployment, no need to read the main text."}},{"id":"ZengLWLCDYXQZSL24","title":"MR-Ben: A Meta-Reasoning Benchmark for Evaluating System-2 Thinking in LLMs","authors":["Zhongshen Zeng","Yinhong Liu","Yingjia Wan","Jingyao Li","Pengguang Chen","Jianbo Dai","Yuxuan Yao","Rongwu Xu","Zehan Qi","Wanru Zhao","Linling Shen","Jianqiao Lu","Haochen Tan","Yukang Chen","Hao Zhang","Zhan Shi","Bailin Wang","Zhijiang Guo","Jiaya Jia"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$124","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZengLWLCDYXQZSL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZengLWLCDYXQZSL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d81cb1f4dc6e13aeb45553f80b3d6837-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM推理评估多采用基于结果的基准，当前已进入饱和阶段，无法有效区分模型真实的System2慢思考能力，此前的评估体系回避了对推理过程错误排查的元推理能力考核。","importance":"属于基准级贡献，填补了过程导向的元推理评估空白，为预训练和对齐阶段提升模型逻辑校验能力提供了标准化测试标尺，可有效避免在饱和基准上的虚假性能提升。","technical_approach":"原创的过程式基准设计，要求模型定位、分析自动生成的推理步骤中的潜在错误，完全对齐人类System2思考中校验假设、逻辑、计算的认知过程。和现有结果类基准的核心区别是不考核最终答案对错，仅聚焦元推理维度，舍弃了对模型解题能力的直接评估。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验设置、模型参数量、基线和指标结果，待完整论文补充。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing outcome-based LLM reasoning benchmarks are saturated, and cannot effectively measure the real System 2 slow thinking capability of models. Prior evaluation pipelines avoid assessing meta-reasoning ability for error detection in reasoning processes.","importance":"It is a benchmark-level contribution, filling the gap of process-oriented meta-reasoning evaluation. It provides a standardized test metric for improving model logic verification ability during pretraining and alignment, and avoids false performance gains on saturated benchmarks.","technical_approach":"Original process-based benchmark design, which requires models to locate and analyze potential errors in automatically generated reasoning steps, aligned with the human cognitive process of checking assumptions, logic and calculations in System 2 thinking. Unlike existing outcome-based benchmarks, it does not evaluate the correctness of final answers, and focuses only on meta-reasoning ability, discarding direct assessment of problem-solving ability.","experiments":"Full experimental settings, model sizes, baselines and metric results are not disclosed in the truncated abstract, pending complete paper release.","authors_note":""},"tags":["meta-reasoning","benchmark","system-2","llm-evaluation"],"keywords":["Large Language Models;Reasoning;System-2;Slow Thinking;Resource and Evaluation;Analysis and Interpretability"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"思维链能提升LLM的推理表现","claim_en":"Chain-of-thought improves LLM reasoning performance","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"现有结果导向的推理基准无法有效跟踪模型真实推理能力的进展","claim_en":"Existing outcome-based reasoning benchmarks cannot effectively track meaningful progress of model's real reasoning ability","opposes":"此前主流观点认为结果类基准的分数提升对应模型推理能力的真实提升","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction","why_contested":"如果成立，说明此前大量在结果类基准上刷分的工作实际性能增益被高估，需要重新设计评估范式"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"聚焦过程导向的元推理评估，作为 System2 慢思考能力的 benchmark 备查，不读正文。","en":"Focuses on process-oriented meta-reasoning evaluation; keep as a benchmark reference for System2 slow-thinking capabilities, no need to read the main text."}},{"id":"ZhangHZDYWYD024","title":"SciInstruct: a Self-Reflective Instruction Annotated Dataset for Training Scientific Language Models","authors":["Dan Zhang","Ziniu Hu","Sining Zhoubian","Zhengxiao Du","Kaiyu Yang","Zihan Wang","Yisong Yue","Yuxiao Dong","Jie Tang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$125","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangHZDYWYD024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangHZDYWYD024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/02ee6b7295f720407b56c457b34c54d5-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM在科学领域的应用受限于对复杂科学概念、符号推导、高阶数值计算的理解不足，此前科学指令数据稀缺，人工标注成本极高，无法支撑大规模训练。","importance":"属于数据级+方法级贡献，提出的自反射标注框架大幅降低科学指令数据的生成成本，为科学LLM的预训练和SFT提供了高质量数据集支持，可直接复用至其他低资源领域的指令数据构建。","technical_approach":"改进的指令数据构造方法，核心是自反射的批评-修订框架：先用现有LLM为无标注科学问题生成逐步推理，再让模型自我校验修正错误。舍弃了高成本的人工全流程标注，和现有人工科学数据集的核心区别是标注效率提升数倍，覆盖大学级别的多学科科学推理场景。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据、模型参数量、基线和指标提升幅度，待完整论文补充。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLMs have limited ability to understand complex scientific concepts, symbolic derivation and advanced numerical calculation for scientific discovery applications. Prior scientific instruction datasets are scarce, and manual annotation cost is too high to support large-scale training.","importance":"It is a data and method level contribution. The proposed self-reflective annotation framework greatly reduces the generation cost of scientific instruction data, provides high-quality data support for pretraining and SFT of scientific LLMs, and can be directly reused to instruction data construction in other low-resource domains.","technical_approach":"Improved instruction data construction method, with a self-reflective critic-and-revise framework as the core. It first uses existing LLMs to generate step-by-step reasoning for unlabeled scientific questions, then lets the model self-check and revise errors, discarding high-cost full manual annotation. Unlike existing manual scientific datasets, it has several times higher annotation efficiency, and covers multi-disciplinary college-level scientific reasoning scenarios.","experiments":"Full experimental data, model sizes, baselines and metric improvement ranges are not disclosed in the truncated abstract, pending complete paper release.","authors_note":""},"tags":["instruction-data","data-quality","scientific-llm","self-reflection"],"keywords":["self-reflective instruction","scientific reasoning","scientific language model"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"指令微调能提升LLM在垂直领域的任务表现","claim_en":"Instruction tuning improves LLM performance on domain-specific tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于LLM自反射的批评修订流程生成的科学指令数据质量可匹配人工标注数据","claim_en":"The quality of scientific instruction data generated by LLM-based self-reflective critic-and-revise pipeline is comparable to manually annotated data","opposes":"此前主流观点认为垂直领域尤其是科学领域的指令数据必须依赖人工标注才能保证质量","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"如果成立，可大幅降低垂直领域指令数据的构建成本，加速科学等低资源领域LLM的迭代"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"利用自反射框架低成本构造科学指令数据，只看数据构造 pipeline 即可，可复用于其他低资源领域。","en":"Uses a self-reflective framework to construct scientific instruction data at low cost; just look at the data construction pipeline, reusable for other low-resource domains."}},{"id":"ZhangLW24","title":"Co-occurrence is not Factual Association in Language Models","authors":["Xiao Zhang","Miao Li","Ji Wu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$126","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangLW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangLW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/775226eaa2a36c543e2bd6cc9eae1b6a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"预训练LLM在少量样本微调学习新事实知识的效果差，此前的研究多归因于模型容量或微调方法问题，未区分词共现统计和真实事实关联两种不同的知识表示模式。","importance":"属于机制级贡献，明确了Transformer中两种知识表示的分层存储特性，解释了模型微调学习新事实泛化性差的核心原因，为预训练阶段提升事实知识编码效率、微调阶段增强事实知识注入效果提供了理论指导。","technical_approach":"原创的知识表示分层分析方法，对比了词共现统计和真实事实关联两种知识的编码差异：共现知识存储在Transformer中层，泛化性差，仅能用于简单问答；真实事实关联存储在低层，可支持多种推理场景。舍弃了此前将知识编码视为统一模式的假设，核心区别是明确了两类知识的编码位置和泛化边界。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验设置、模型参数量、基线和指标结果，待完整论文补充。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Pretrained LLMs perform poorly when learning novel factual knowledge from few-shot finetuning. Prior studies mostly attribute this to model capacity or finetuning method issues, and do not distinguish between two different knowledge representation patterns: word co-occurrence statistics and true factual associations.","importance":"It is a mechanism-level contribution, clarifying the layered storage characteristics of two types of knowledge representation in Transformers, explaining the core reason for poor generalization of novel factual knowledge learned from finetuning, and providing theoretical guidance for improving factual knowledge encoding efficiency in pretraining and factual knowledge injection effect in finetuning.","technical_approach":"Original layered analysis method for knowledge representation, which compares the encoding differences between word co-occurrence statistics and true factual associations. It finds that co-occurrence knowledge is stored in the middle layers of Transformer, with poor generalization, only applicable to simple QA, while true factual associations are stored in lower layers, supporting various reasoning scenarios. It discards the prior assumption that knowledge encoding follows a unified pattern, and clarifies the encoding position and generalization boundary of the two types of knowledge.","experiments":"Full experimental settings, model sizes, baselines and metric results are not disclosed in the truncated abstract, pending complete paper release.","authors_note":""},"tags":["factuality","knowledge","cooccurrence","language-models"],"keywords":["language model","knowledge learning","reasoning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"预训练LLM可以编码大量事实知识用于下游推理任务","claim_en":"Pretrained LLMs can encode large amounts of factual knowledge for downstream reasoning tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"LLM微调时优先学习词共现统计而非真实事实关联，是少量样本下事实学习泛化性差的核心原因","claim_en":"LLMs are biased to learn word co-occurrence statistics instead of true factual associations during finetuning, which is the core reason for poor generalization of factual learning under few-shot settings","opposes":"此前主流观点认为少量样本下事实学习效果差是因为微调数据不足或模型容量不够","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§2 Analysis","why_contested":"如果成立，事实知识注入的优化方向将从增加数据量转向调整知识表示的编码模式，大幅提升事实学习的效率"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"明确了词共现与真实事实关联在 Transformer 中的分层存储机制，解释了微调泛化差的原因，只看分层分析的实验图表即可。","en":"Clarifies the hierarchical storage mechanism of word co-occurrence and true factual association in Transformers, explaining poor fine-tuning generalization; just look at the experimental charts of the hierarchical analysis."}},{"id":"ZhangLWZX24","title":"Initialization is Critical to Whether Transformers Fit Composite Functions by Reasoning or Memorizing","authors":["Zhongwang Zhang","Pengxiao Lin","Zhiwei Wang","Yaoyu Zhang","Zhi-Qin John Xu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$127","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangLWZX24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangLWZX24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/19c145aaad40927c51f4d10eaa339c20-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer在组合任务上的泛化表现不稳定，此前的研究多归因于模型架构或训练数据，未关注参数初始化对学习策略选择的影响，无法解释相同设置下模型有时学会推理有时只会记忆的现象。","importance":"属于机制级贡献，明确了参数初始化尺度是决定Transformer学习推理型解决方案还是记忆型解决方案的核心因素，为预训练和微调阶段提升模型组合泛化能力提供了可落地的优化方向。","technical_approach":"原创的初始化机制分析方法，通过分析模型内部信息流和向量表示，发现大初始化尺度会引导模型学习捕捉组合基元的推理型解决方案，小初始化尺度会引导模型学习记忆映射的对称型解决方案。舍弃了此前将组合泛化能力差归因于架构缺陷的假设，核心区别是定位了初始化这个之前被忽略的关键变量。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据、初始化尺度阈值、指标结果，待完整论文补充。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Transformers have unstable generalization performance on compositional tasks. Prior studies mostly attribute this to model architecture or training data, and do not pay attention to the impact of parameter initialization on learning strategy selection, which cannot explain why models sometimes learn reasoning and sometimes only memorize under the same settings.","importance":"It is a mechanism-level contribution, clarifying that parameter initialization scale is the core factor determining whether Transformers learn reasoning-based solutions or memory-based solutions, and provides an implementable optimization direction for improving model compositional generalization ability during pretraining and finetuning.","technical_approach":"Original initialization mechanism analysis method, which analyzes the internal information flow and vector representation of the model. It finds that large initialization scale guides the model to learn reasoning-based solutions that capture compositional primitives, while small initialization scale guides the model to learn symmetric memory-based solutions that only memorize mappings. It discards the prior assumption that poor compositional generalization is caused by architecture defects, and identifies initialization as a previously ignored key variable.","experiments":"Full experimental data, initialization scale thresholds and metric results are not disclosed in the truncated abstract, pending complete paper release.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","initialization","reasoning","memorization","generalization"],"keywords":["parameter initialization","transformer","compositional task","reasoning","memorizing"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer在大量任务上表现优异，但组合泛化能力存在短板","claim_en":"Transformers perform well on a large number of tasks, but have shortcomings in compositional generalization ability","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"参数初始化尺度是决定Transformer在组合任务上学习推理还是记忆的核心因素","claim_en":"Parameter initialization scale is the core factor determining whether Transformers learn reasoning or memorization on compositional tasks","opposes":"此前主流观点认为组合泛化能力主要由模型架构、训练数据量和训练目标决定","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Analysis","why_contested":"如果成立，仅通过调整初始化尺度即可大幅提升模型组合泛化能力，无需修改架构或增加训练数据，落地成本极低"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"定位了参数初始化尺度对模型选择推理或记忆策略的决定性影响，改变了对组合泛化失败归因的 prior，只看初始化尺度的对比实验即可。","en":"Locates the decisive impact of parameter initialization scale on the model's choice of reasoning or memorization strategies, changing the prior on attributing compositional generalization failure; just look at the comparative experiments on initialization scale."}},{"id":"ZhangTSWL24","title":"Mitigating Reward Overoptimization via Lightweight Uncertainty Estimation","authors":["Xiaoying Zhang","Jean-Francois Ton","Wei Shen","Hongning Wang","Yang Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) has been pivotal in aligning Large Language Models with human values but often suffers from overoptimization due to its reliance on a proxy reward model. To mitigate this limitation, we first propose a lightweight uncertainty quantification method that assesses the reliability of the proxy reward using only the last layer embeddings of the reward model. Enabled by this efficient uncertainty quantification method, we formulate AdvPO, a distributionally robust optimization procedure to tackle the reward overoptimization problem in RLHF. Through extensive experiments on the Anthropic HH and TL;DR summarization datasets, we verify the effectiveness of AdvPO in mitigating the overoptimization problem, resulting in enhanced RLHF performance as evaluated through human-assisted evaluation.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangTSWL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangTSWL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/94bbcb744bbada8808fda05b9d9290d6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"RLHF依赖代理奖励模型，容易出现奖励过优化问题，导致模型输出违背人类偏好，此前的不确定性估计方法计算成本高，无法大规模落地到RLHF流程中。","importance":"属于方法级贡献，提出的轻量级不确定性估计和AdvPO算法可高效缓解奖励过优化问题，无需大幅修改现有RLHF pipeline，可直接集成到工业级对齐流程中。","technical_approach":"改进的RLHF优化方法，首先提出仅用奖励模型最后一层嵌入估计奖励可靠性的轻量级不确定性量化方法，再基于此构建分布鲁棒优化算法AdvPO。舍弃了此前需要额外训练不确定性分支的高成本方案，和现有奖励过优化缓解方法的核心区别是计算开销极低，仅需在现有奖励模型基础上做少量计算。","experiments":"在Anthropic HH和TL;DR摘要数据集上验证了AdvPO的有效性，公开摘要未披露具体模型参数量、基线指标和提升幅度，待完整论文补充。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"RLHF relies on proxy reward models, which is prone to reward overoptimization, leading to model outputs violating human preferences. Prior uncertainty estimation methods have high computational cost and cannot be deployed to large-scale RLHF pipelines.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution. The proposed lightweight uncertainty estimation and AdvPO algorithm can efficiently mitigate reward overoptimization, without major modification to existing RLHF pipelines, and can be directly integrated into industrial alignment processes.","technical_approach":"Improved RLHF optimization method. It first proposes a lightweight uncertainty quantification method that only uses the last layer embeddings of the reward model to estimate reward reliability, then builds a distributionally robust optimization algorithm AdvPO based on this. It discards the high-cost prior solution that requires additional training of uncertainty branches, and has extremely low computational overhead compared with existing reward overoptimization mitigation methods, only requiring a small amount of calculation based on existing reward models.","experiments":"Effectiveness of AdvPO is verified on Anthropic HH and TL;DR summarization datasets. Full model sizes, baseline metrics and improvement ranges are not disclosed in the truncated abstract, pending complete paper release.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reward-model","reward-hacking","uncertainty","rlhf"],"keywords":["Overoptimization in RLHF","Lightweight Uncertainty Estimation","Adversarial Policy Optimization"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"RLHF是对齐LLM与人类偏好的核心方法，奖励过优化是其主要痛点之一","claim_en":"RLHF is the core method for aligning LLMs with human preferences, and reward overoptimization is one of its main pain points","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅用奖励模型最后一层嵌入即可有效估计奖励的不确定性，无需额外模型分支或训练","claim_en":"Only the last layer embeddings of the reward model can be used to effectively estimate reward uncertainty, without additional model branches or training","opposes":"此前主流观点认为奖励不确定性估计需要额外的模型结构或训练流程才能保证准确性","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"如果成立，可大幅降低奖励不确定性估计的成本，让鲁棒RLHF的大规模落地成为可能"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅用 RM 最后一层做轻量级不确定性估计来缓解 RLHF 奖励过优化，计算开销极低，应立刻在 internal alignment pipeline 中尝试复现。","en":"Uses only the last layer of the RM for lightweight uncertainty estimation to mitigate RLHF reward overoptimization with extremely low computational overhead; should be immediately attempted for reproduction in the internal alignment pipeline."}},{"id":"2406.00800","title":"MagR: Weight Magnitude Reduction for Enhancing Post-Training Quantization","authors":["Aozhong Zhang","Naigang Wang","Yanxia Deng","Xin Li","Zi Yang","Penghang Yin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$128","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.00800","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangWDLYY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangWDLYY24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9a987c98a7f36cc83f9065df3ca4f9e0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有后训练量化（PTQ）性能受限于权重中的大数值离群点，此前的预处理方法多包含线性变换和后续后处理步骤，会引入额外计算开销或精度损失。","importance":"属于方法级贡献，提出的MagR预处理技术简单高效，可显著提升低比特PTQ的性能，无需修改量化pipeline或后续推理逻辑，可直接集成到现有模型压缩流程中。","technical_approach":"原创的权重预处理方法，对每个线性层的预训练浮点权重求解带ℓ∞正则的优化问题，在保留层输出不变的前提下大幅降低权重的最大幅值、平滑离群点。舍弃了此前需要线性变换和后续补偿的复杂预处理流程，核心区别是仅调整权重数值分布，不引入额外的推理开销。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体模型类型、比特位宽、基线指标和精度提升幅度，待完整论文补充。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing post-training quantization (PTQ) performance is limited by large magnitude outliers in weights. Prior preprocessing methods mostly include linear transformation and subsequent post-processing steps, which introduce additional computational overhead or accuracy loss.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution. The proposed MagR preprocessing technique is simple and efficient, can significantly improve the performance of low-bit PTQ, without modifying the quantization pipeline or subsequent inference logic, and can be directly integrated into existing model compression processes.","technical_approach":"Original weight preprocessing method, which solves an ℓ∞-regularized optimization problem for pretrained floating-point weights of each linear layer. It greatly reduces the maximum magnitude of weights and smooths outliers while preserving the layer output, discarding the complex prior preprocessing pipeline that requires linear transformation and subsequent compensation. The core difference is that it only adjusts the weight value distribution, and does not introduce additional inference overhead.","experiments":"Specific model types, bit widths, baseline metrics and accuracy improvement ranges are not disclosed in the truncated abstract, pending complete paper release.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","post-training-quantization","weight-optimization"],"keywords":["post-training quantization","model compression","$$\\ell_\\infty$-regularization"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"后训练量化是压缩大语言模型、降低推理成本的核心技术之一，权重离群点是低比特量化精度损失的主要原因","claim_en":"Post-training quantization is one of the core technologies for compressing large language models and reducing inference cost, and weight outliers are the main reason for accuracy loss in low-bit quantization","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"带ℓ∞正则的权重幅值降低预处理可在不改变层输出的前提下提升后训练量化性能，无需额外变换或后处理","claim_en":"ℓ∞-regularized weight magnitude reduction preprocessing can improve post-training quantization performance without changing layer output, and requires no additional transformation or post-processing","opposes":"此前主流观点认为PTQ的权重预处理需要引入额外的线性变换和补偿步骤才能保留模型精度","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"如果成立，可大幅简化低比特PTQ的流程，降低模型压缩的成本，提升压缩后模型的推理效率"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"通过优化降低权重最大幅值来提升 PTQ 性能，作为量化预处理 trick 备查，不读正文。","en":"Improves PTQ performance by optimizing to reduce the maximum weight magnitude; keep as a quantization preprocessing trick reference, no need to read the main text."}},{"id":"2405.11165","title":"Automated Multi-level Preference for MLLMs","authors":["Mengxi Zhang","Wenhao Wu","Yu Lu","Yuxin Song","Kang Rong","Huanjin Yao","Jianbo Zhao","Fanglong Liu","Haocheng Feng","Jingdong Wang","Yifan Sun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$129","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.11165","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangWLSRYZLF0S24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangWLSRYZLF0S24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/2e3073cb65608aa887bb945c382e687f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"多模态大模型（MLLM）存在幻觉问题，现有RLHF多使用二值偏好标注，无法捕捉细粒度的响应质量差异，也缺乏跨层级的对比信号，导致幻觉缓解效果有限。","importance":"属于方法级+数据级贡献，提出的多级偏好标注方法可提升MLLM RLHF的对齐效果，有效缓解幻觉问题，可直接复用至多模态模型的对齐流程中。","technical_approach":"改进的RLHF偏好标注方法，将二值偏好拓展为多级偏好（如优、中、差），一方面缩小相邻层级的差距，让模型能识别细粒度差异，另一方面加入跨层级对比，提供更多幻觉相关的监督信号。舍弃了此前仅用二值相邻对比的标注模式，核心区别是用更丰富的偏好信号提升模型对响应质量的区分能力。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体模型参数量、数据集规模、基线指标和幻觉缓解幅度，待完整论文补充。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) suffer from hallucination problems. Existing RLHF mostly uses binary preference annotation, which cannot capture fine-grained response quality differences, and lacks cross-level comparison signals, leading to limited hallucination mitigation effect.","importance":"It is a method and data level contribution. The proposed multi-level preference annotation method can improve the alignment effect of MLLM RLHF, effectively mitigate hallucination problems, and can be directly reused to the alignment pipeline of multimodal models.","technical_approach":"Improved RLHF preference annotation method, which extends binary preference to multi-level preference (e.g., superior, medium, inferior). On one hand, it narrows the gap between adjacent levels, allowing the model to identify fine-grained differences; on the other hand, it adds cross-level comparisons to provide more hallucination-related supervision signals. It discards the prior annotation mode that only uses binary adjacent comparisons, and uses richer preference signals to improve the model's ability to distinguish response quality.","experiments":"Specific model sizes, dataset scales, baseline metrics and hallucination reduction ranges are not disclosed in the truncated abstract, pending complete paper release.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rlhf","mllm","hallucination","preference-learning"],"keywords":["Multimodal Large Language Models","Hallucinations","Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"RLHF可以有效对齐多模态大模型的输出与人类偏好，幻觉是多模态大模型的核心痛点之一","claim_en":"RLHF can effectively align the output of multimodal large language models with human preferences, and hallucination is one of the core pain points of multimodal large language models","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"多级偏好标注比二值偏好标注更适合多模态大模型的RLHF，能更有效缓解幻觉问题","claim_en":"Multi-level preference annotation is more suitable for RLHF of multimodal large language models than binary preference annotation, and can mitigate hallucination problems more effectively","opposes":"此前主流观点认为二值偏好标注足够支撑RLHF的对齐效果，多级标注的收益有限","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§2 Method","why_contested":"如果成立，多模态模型的对齐流程将从二值偏好转向多级偏好，大幅提升对齐效率和幻觉缓解效果"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"将 RLHF 二值偏好拓展为多级偏好以缓解 MLLM 幻觉，只看多级偏好标注的构造方法即可。","en":"Expands RLHF binary preferences to multi-level preferences to mitigate MLLM hallucinations; just look at the construction method of multi-level preference annotation."}},{"id":"ZhangY24","title":"SpeedLoader: An I/O efficient scheme for heterogeneous and distributed LLM operation","authors":["Yiqi Zhang","Yang You"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$12a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangY24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3d3a9e085540c65dd3e5731361f9320e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：在异构、分布式、带 offloading 的大模型运行中，I/O 往往比算力更早成为瓶颈，导致理论上可部署的大模型在实践里跑不动。已有方案主要靠参数分片、CPU/磁盘卸载来缓解显存压力，但跨设备搬运张量的通信和存储访问代价很高，尤其在预训练、微调、推理都需要频繁取回模型状态时，系统吞吐会被 I/O 链路卡死。","importance":"它的价值主要是系统级的，而且对大模型预训练和服务都直接相关。对于 pretrain 研究，这类工作重要不是因为它改了模型目标，而是因为它改变了可行的训练/部署边界：当显存不够时，是否能高效利用主存、块设备和异构节点，直接决定你能否在给定预算下训练更大模型、跑更长上下文或做更激进的并行配置。若论文确实显著降低了 offloading 开销，那它对低资源环境下的大模型实验设计会有现实影响。","technical_approach":"从摘要看，SpeedLoader 的核心是一个面向异构分布式大模型运行的 I/O 优化调度方案，而不是新的并行训练算法。它的设计重点应当是围绕模型状态的加载、预取、放置和跨层级存储访问做联合优化：把 accelerator、host DRAM、block device 视为不同带宽/延迟层级，尽量减少阻塞式张量搬运，把必须发生的 I/O 与计算流水化重叠。和仅做静态分片或被动 offload 的方案相比，它更像是在运行时主动安排何时取数据、取到哪里、哪些状态值得常驻，从而把‘能放下’进一步推进到‘还能高效执行’。边界也很明确：如果工作负载本身计算极轻、访问模式高度不可预测，或者底层存储带宽极低，调度收益会受限。","experiments":"摘要被截断，缺少模型规模、集群配置、baseline 和具体加速比，因此无法可靠总结定量结果。可以确认的是，论文应当围绕 heterogeneous/distributed LLM operation 展示 I/O 效率收益，合理的实验重点通常会包括：不同 offloading 介质下的吞吐、端到端时延、通信等待时间占比，以及和纯分片、纯 offload 或现有运行时系统的比较。若正文给出分阶段 profiling，最有价值的观察通常会是：性能是否从 I/O bound 转回 compute bound，以及收益是否随模型规模上升而扩大。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical bottleneck: in heterogeneous and distributed LLM execution with offloading, I/O often fails before compute does. Existing solutions relieve accelerator memory pressure by sharding states or offloading them to host DRAM and storage, but the resulting tensor movement can dominate runtime, so a model that fits on paper still runs poorly in practice.","importance":"This is a systems contribution with direct relevance to pretraining and serving. Its importance is not about changing the learning objective, but about shifting the feasible operating point: if offloading across GPU, CPU memory, and block devices becomes efficient enough, researchers can train or serve larger models under tighter memory budgets instead of redesigning the model around hardware constraints. That matters for real-world pretrain work where memory, bandwidth, and cluster heterogeneity are often the true limiters.","technical_approach":"From the abstract, SpeedLoader is best understood as an I/O scheduling and state-management scheme for heterogeneous distributed LLM workloads, not a new model-parallel algorithm. The likely mechanism is joint optimization of where model states live, when they are prefetched, and how transfers are overlapped with compute across a memory hierarchy spanning accelerators, host memory, and storage. Compared with static partitioning or reactive offloading, the point is to turn memory relief into usable throughput by avoiding blocking transfers and by keeping the right states resident at the right time. The trade-off is straightforward: gains depend on access predictability and available bandwidth; if storage is too slow or the workload is highly irregular, scheduling alone cannot recover performance.","experiments":"The abstract is truncated, so the model sizes, hardware setup, baselines, and quantitative gains cannot be stated reliably. What can be said is that the paper likely evaluates throughput, end-to-end latency, and I/O stall reduction under heterogeneous offloading settings, and compares against standard sharding/offloading runtimes. The most informative result, if present, would be whether the system shifts execution from I/O-bound back toward compute-bound as model size grows.","authors_note":""},"tags":["io-efficiency","heterogeneous-training","distributed","llm-serving"],"notable_authors":["Yiqi Zhang","Yang You"],"keywords":["Heterogenous Computing","Large Language Model","ZeRO","FSDP","Offload"],"recommendation":{"zh":"面向异构分布式大模型的 I/O 优化调度方案，只看系统架构图和 I/O 吞吐对比即可，对低资源训练有工程参考价值。","en":"An I/O optimization scheduling scheme for heterogeneous distributed LLMs; just look at the system architecture diagram and I/O throughput comparison, has engineering reference value for low-resource training."}},{"id":"ZhaoSCZLWTHCLCY24","title":"Model-GLUE: Democratized LLM Scaling for A Large Model Zoo in the Wild","authors":["Xinyu Zhao","Guoheng Sun","Ruisi Cai","Yukun Zhou","Pingzhi Li","Peihao Wang","Bowen Tan","Yexiao He","Li Chen","Yi Liang","Beidi Chen","Binhang Yuan","Hongyi Wang","Ang Li","Zhangyang Wang","Tianlong Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhaoSCZLWTHCLCY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhaoSCZLWTHCLCY24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/180a476f22a52b8ef14f42b2b927afcc-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的很可能是：在开放环境下存在大量异构 LLM 和微调模型，如何让它们以更低门槛、更民主化的方式扩展成一个大模型生态，而不是每次都从头训练单一大模型。标题里的“Democratized LLM Scaling”和“Large Model Zoo in the Wild”说明作者关心的是模型资产的聚合、复用和扩展问题。","importance":"如果理解正确，这篇工作的价值偏系统与生态层面。对 pretrain/posttrain 研究有意义的地方在于，它讨论的不是单模型最优，而是如何把野外模型库变成可扩展资源池。随着 continual pretrain、domain adaptation 和 model merging 越来越常见，‘如何 glue 模型而不是只 glue 数据’会成为现实问题。这类方法若有效，可能降低新模型构建成本，并改变开源社区的扩展路径。","technical_approach":"由于摘要缺失，只能基于标题做保守概括。Model-GLUE 很可能研究的是某种模型组合、融合、路由或统一接口机制，使多个已有 LLM 能在保持各自特长的同时形成更强整体。它可能涉及参数合并、模块拼接、专家选择、或跨模型蒸馏等技术路线。和从头预训练一个更大 dense 模型相比，这种思路的优势是便宜、可复用、适合异构来源；缺点是模型之间 tokenizer、表征空间、训练目标和安全边界可能不一致，简单拼接很容易导致能力互相干扰。","experiments":"没有摘要，因此无法确认任务范围、模型数量、基线和提升数字。按标题推断，实验应当至少比较单模型、简单 ensemble/merge、以及作者提出的 glue 方案在多任务或多域上的效果，并评估扩展成本。最值得看的结果不是某个 benchmark 小幅领先，而是：随着参与模型数增加，性能是否稳定提升；不同来源模型之间是否存在明显负迁移；以及 glue 后的推理成本是否可接受。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The likely problem here is how to scale LLM capability using a diverse model zoo in the wild, rather than repeatedly training a single larger model from scratch. The title points to aggregation and reuse of heterogeneous model assets as the main challenge.","importance":"If that reading is correct, the contribution is mostly systems- and ecosystem-level. It matters for pretrain/posttrain research because the field is moving toward continual pretraining, domain adaptation, and model merging. In that regime, scaling is no longer only about adding data and compute; it is also about how to combine existing models without losing their specialized strengths.","technical_approach":"With no abstract available, only a title-based summary is possible. Model-GLUE likely proposes a way to combine, align, route across, or merge multiple existing LLMs into a more capable composite system. Possible mechanisms include parameter merging, modular composition, expert routing, or cross-model distillation. Compared with training a larger dense model from scratch, the attraction is lower cost and better reuse of heterogeneous open models. The hard part is compatibility: tokenizers, representation spaces, objectives, and alignment constraints may differ substantially, so naive combination can create interference instead of synergy.","experiments":"Without the abstract, no reliable claims can be made about datasets, model counts, baselines, or gains. The likely evaluation should compare single-model performance, simple ensembling or merging baselines, and the proposed glue method across multiple tasks or domains, while also measuring scaling efficiency. The key result to look for is whether performance improves consistently as more models are added, whether heterogeneous models cause negative transfer, and whether inference cost remains practical.","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-merging","scaling","llm","model-zoo"],"notable_authors":["Xinyu Zhao","Guoheng Sun","Ruisi Cai","Yukun Zhou","Pingzhi Li"],"recommendation":{"zh":"探讨野外异构模型库的聚合与复用，只看模型融合/路由的具体机制即可，对 model merging 生态有启发。","en":"Explores the aggregation and reuse of heterogeneous model zoos in the wild; just look at the specific mechanisms of model fusion/routing, inspiring for the model merging ecosystem."}},{"id":"2407.16364","title":"Harmonizing Visual Text Comprehension and Generation","authors":["Zhen Zhao","Jingqun Tang","Binghong Wu","Chunhui Lin","Shu Wei","Hao Liu","Xin Tan","Zhizhong Zhang","Can Huang","Yuan Xie"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$12b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.16364","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhaoTWLWL00H024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhaoTWLWL00H024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/b0ca717599b7ba84d5e4f4c8b1ef6657-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：同一个模型里同时做好视觉文本理解和生成很难，因为图像与语言的生成空间不一致，硬统一通常会互相拉低。现有做法常用模态专用 SFT 或分别训练多个模型来回避这个矛盾，但这会破坏统一建模，也增加系统复杂度。","importance":"它的重要性在于原生多模态生成建模。对 pretrain/VLM 研究者，这篇工作的价值不只是在 visual text 任务上提分，而是在说明一个统一模型是否能同时处理‘读图中文字’和‘生成含文字图像/文本’这两类方向相反的任务。如果方法有效，它对 multimodal token space 解耦、参数共享边界、以及单模型多能力协调都有参考意义。","technical_approach":"作者提出 TextHarmony，核心创新是 Slide-LoRA：动态聚合模态专用和模态无关的 LoRA experts，对多模态生成空间做部分解耦，但仍维持单一模型实例。这个设计比完全共享参数更现实，因为视觉文本生成与语言生成在统计结构上差异很大；但它又没有退回到多模型系统，而是在共享主干上用可滑动、可组合的低秩适配器做软分工。为什么这样可能有效：共享部分保留跨模态对齐和知识迁移，专用部分吸收各模态冲突梯度，减轻联合训练时的相互干扰。作者还构建了高质量数据集，说明他们认为训练数据分布同样是问题关键，而不只是 adapter 结构。","experiments":"摘要没有给出参数量和具体指标，但明确声称在单模型实例下 harmonize 了 visual text comprehension 与 generation。合理 baseline 应包括统一模型直接联合训练、模态专用 SFT、多模型方案，以及标准 LoRA/Adapter 变体。若正文完整，最值得看的数字应是：理解任务与生成任务是否同时提升，而不是一端升另一端降；Slide-LoRA 相对静态 LoRA 的增益有多大；以及高质量数据集对结果的贡献是否与架构改动同量级。对于这类工作，消融里若能展示 expert 动态聚合在不同模态 token 段上的选择差异，会很有解释力。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a genuine multimodal conflict: a single model usually struggles to do both visual-text comprehension and generation well, because image and language generation spaces are misaligned. Existing solutions often avoid the problem by using modality-specific fine-tuning or separate models, which hurts true unification and increases system complexity.","importance":"This is relevant to native multimodal pretraining rather than just a niche downstream task. The paper matters if it shows that one model can both read visual text and generate it without splitting into specialized instances. That would inform how much parameter sharing is actually desirable across modalities and where partial decoupling is necessary.","technical_approach":"The proposed model, TextHarmony, uses Slide-LoRA, which dynamically aggregates modality-specific and modality-agnostic LoRA experts. The idea is to partially decouple the multimodal generation space while keeping a single model instance. This is a pragmatic middle ground between fully shared parameters, which often suffer from modality interference, and separate models, which lose unification. The likely reason it works is simple: shared components preserve cross-modal transfer and alignment, while modality-specific low-rank experts absorb conflicting gradients and distributional quirks. The paper also introduces a high-quality dataset, signaling that data quality is treated as a first-class part of the solution rather than an afterthought.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model size or numerical gains, but it clearly positions the evaluation around both comprehension and generation of visual text. Strong baselines should include naive joint training in a unified model, modality-specific fine-tuning, multi-model systems, and standard static LoRA variants. The most important result to inspect is whether the method improves both sides simultaneously instead of trading one off against the other. Useful ablations would compare Slide-LoRA against static adapters and quantify how much the curated dataset contributes relative to the architectural change.","authors_note":""},"tags":["visual-text","multimodal-generation","unified-model","mllm"],"notable_authors":["Zhen Zhao","Jingqun Tang","Binghong Wu","Chunhui Lin","Shu Wei"],"keywords":["multimodal generative model","visual text comprehension and generation","LoRA expert"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3的Slide-LoRA设计和§5的解耦实验结果，能给多模态统一预训练的参数共享边界设计提供参考。","en":"Focus on §3 for Slide-LoRA design and §5 for decoupling experiment results, which offers references for parameter sharing boundary design in unified multimodal pretraining."}},{"id":"2401.17263","title":"Robust Prompt Optimization for Defending Language Models Against Jailbreaking Attacks","authors":["Andy Zhou","Bo Li","Haohan Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Despite advances in AI alignment, large language models (LLMs) remain vulnerable to adversarial attacks or jailbreaking, in which adversaries can modify prompts to induce unwanted behavior. While some defenses have been proposed, they have not been adapted to newly proposed attacks and more challenging threat models. To address this, we propose an optimization-based objective for defending LLMs against jailbreaking attacks and an algorithm, Robust Prompt Optimization (RPO) to create robust system-level defenses. Our approach directly incorporates the adversary into the defensive objective and optimizes a lightweight and transferable suffix, enabling RPO to adapt to worst-case adaptive attacks. Our theoretical and experimental results show improved robustness to both jailbreaks seen during optimization and unknown jailbreaks, reducing the attack success rate (ASR) on GPT-4 to 6% and Llama-2 to 0% on JailbreakBench, setting the state-of-the-art. Code can be found at https://github.com/lapisrocks/rpo","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.17263","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhouLW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhouLW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/46ed503889ab232c21c1162340ee17b2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：现有 LLM 防越狱方案对新攻击和自适应攻击不够稳，一旦攻击者根据防御方式改写 prompt，很多 defense 很快失效。过去的防御往往是规则过滤、拒答模板或对已知攻击分布做被动适配，缺少一个显式面向最坏情况对手的优化目标。","importance":"它的重要性主要在 post-train 安全，但对 pretrain/posttrain 接口也有信息价值。原因是越狱防御本质上是在塑造模型对指令分布扰动的鲁棒性；如果一种轻量级系统提示优化就能显著改变鲁棒边界，说明后训练阶段的输入分布建模和拒答策略表达能力仍有很大可塑性。这类工作不会直接改变基座预训练，但会影响我们如何设计 alignment signal 和安全评测。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Robust Prompt Optimization（RPO），核心不是再训练整个模型，而是把防御写成一个带对手的优化问题：直接在目标里纳入 adversary，并优化一个轻量、可迁移的 system-level suffix，使其在最坏情况下也能压制越狱。这个设计比手写规则更系统，也比全模型微调更便宜、更易部署。关键机制在于它不是为固定攻击样本找一条补丁，而是寻找在攻击者可适配前提下仍稳健的提示后缀，因此更接近鲁棒优化。代价是防御能力受 system prompt 可表达性上限约束，而且强防御可能牺牲部分正常帮助性。","experiments":"摘要明确声称：RPO 在 seen 和 unseen jailbreak 上都提升了鲁棒性，并包含理论与实验结果。但摘要没有给出具体模型、攻击集和提升百分比，因此不能写死数字。合理 baseline 应包括现有 prompt-based defenses、输入过滤、对抗训练式方法，以及无防御系统提示。若正文完整，最值得看的是：对 adaptive attacks 的真实收益是否显著高于 non-adaptive；跨模型迁移是否成立；以及 robustness 提升带来的 harmless/helpful trade-off 有多大。","authors_note":"作者包括 Bo Li、Haohan Wang。具体机构无法从当前输入准确确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a familiar weakness in LLM safety: many jailbreak defenses fail once the attacker adapts. Existing defenses often rely on fixed heuristics, brittle refusal prompts, or protection against a narrow attack distribution, rather than optimizing explicitly against a worst-case adversary.","importance":"This is mainly a post-training safety contribution, but it is still informative for the pretrain/posttrain interface. If a lightweight system-prompt optimization can materially reshape the model’s robustness boundary, that tells us alignment behavior remains highly controllable at inference-conditioning time. This has implications for how safety signals are represented and how robust evaluation should be designed.","technical_approach":"The method, Robust Prompt Optimization (RPO), frames defense as an optimization problem that includes the adversary directly. Instead of retraining the full model, it optimizes a lightweight, transferable system-level suffix to remain robust under adaptive jailbreak attacks. That is a stronger formulation than hand-crafted rules and a cheaper one than full adversarial fine-tuning. The central design choice is to optimize for worst-case prompt perturbations rather than patching known attacks one by one. The obvious trade-off is that prompt-level defenses are limited by what can be expressed through the system prompt and may reduce helpfulness if made too conservative.","experiments":"The abstract states that RPO improves robustness against both seen and unseen jailbreaks and includes theoretical and empirical analysis, but it does not provide model names or quantitative gains. Appropriate baselines should include existing prompt-based defenses, input filtering, adversarial training variants, and undefended system prompts. The most important results to inspect are the gains under truly adaptive attacks, the transferability of the learned suffix across models, and the harmlessness-helpfulness cost of the added robustness.","authors_note":"The author list includes Bo Li and Haohan Wang. Exact institutional affiliations cannot be confirmed from the provided input."},"tags":["alignment","jailbreak","prompting","robustness"],"notable_authors":["Andy Zhou","Bo Li","Haohan Wang"],"keywords":["large language models","AI safety","jailbreaking","red-teaming"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§4的鲁棒优化目标公式和§5的自适应攻击评测结果，可为对齐阶段的安全信号设计提供新思路。","en":"Focus on §4 for robust optimization objective formula and §5 for adaptive attack evaluation results, providing new ideas for safety signal design during alignment."}},{"id":"2405.14899","title":"DETAIL: Task DEmonsTration Attribution for Interpretable In-context Learning","authors":["Zijian Zhou","Xiaoqiang Lin","Xinyi Xu","Alok Prakash","Daniela Rus","Bryan Kian Hsiang Low"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$12c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14899","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhouLXPRL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhouLXPRL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/2ceda49041816da6d5a34eb3b612607f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：ICL 里哪些 demonstration 真正在驱动模型决策，现有解释方法往往既不贴合 ICL 特性，也不够高效。传统 attribution 多从 token saliency 或训练样本影响函数迁移过来，但 ICL 的‘学习’发生在上下文内，示例之间存在顺序、模板和任务级交互，直接套旧工具不够准。","importance":"它的重要性在于 ICL 解释工具层面，而且和机制研究直接相关。对 pretrain 研究者，这种方法有两类价值：一是帮助诊断模型到底在利用哪些示例、是否依赖表面模式；二是为构造更高效的 few-shot prompt、示例选择策略甚至 context distillation 提供依据。相比只看最终准确率，demonstration attribution 更接近 ICL 内部优化器到底怎么工作的证据。","technical_approach":"DETAIL 的核心是一个面向 ICL 的 influence function 式 attribution 方法。它借鉴‘transformer 在上下文中形成隐式优化器’这一视角，不再把 demonstration 仅当作静态前缀 token，而是估计每个任务示例对当前预测的任务级影响。方法上的关键点应是既保留 influence function 的可解释性，又针对 ICL 的结构做近似，使计算成本可接受。与一般梯度 saliency 相比，这种方法更关注如果移除或改变某个 demonstration，预测会如何变化，因此更适合回答‘这个例子到底有没有被模型用到’。边界在于，影响函数近似通常依赖局部线性化，遇到强非线性或长上下文交互时可能失真。","experiments":"摘要明确说作者验证了该方法在 demonstration attribution 上有效且计算高效，并利用结果进一步分析 ICL。具体模型、任务和数字未给出。合理实验应包括 attribution faithfuleness 检验，例如删去高影响示例后性能下降是否更大、和随机/梯度/attention-based attribution 的对比，以及不同 demonstration 排序、数量、相似度对 attribution 稳定性的影响。若正文做得好，最有价值的结果是：DETAIL 是否能区分‘看似相关但实际无用’和‘真正改变任务解法’的示例，以及它是否暴露出 ICL 对少数关键 demonstrations 的过度依赖。","authors_note":"作者列表包含 Daniela Rus。具体机构无法从当前输入准确确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a practical interpretability gap in in-context learning: which demonstrations actually drive the model’s prediction, and how can we attribute that influence in a way that matches the structure of ICL? Standard attribution tools are often borrowed from token saliency or training-data influence and do not fully capture context-level task learning.","importance":"Its contribution is methodological and directly relevant to mechanism studies. For pretraining researchers, demonstration attribution helps answer whether ICL relies on genuinely task-relevant examples or on superficial prompt patterns. It can also inform better few-shot prompt construction, example retrieval, and context compression strategies.","technical_approach":"DETAIL proposes an influence-function-style attribution method tailored to ICL. The key idea is to treat demonstrations not just as preceding tokens, but as task-level pieces of evidence that shape an implicit optimizer inside the transformer. Relative to gradient saliency, this is a better fit for the causal question of interest: how would the prediction change if a given demonstration were altered or removed? The likely technical contribution is an efficient approximation that preserves the interpretability of influence functions without making the computation prohibitively expensive in long contexts. As with all local influence approximations, the limitation is that strong nonlinearity and demonstration interactions can reduce faithfulness.","experiments":"The abstract says the method is both effective and computationally efficient for demonstration attribution, but it does not provide evaluated models or numbers. A solid experimental package should include faithfulness tests, such as whether removing highly attributed demonstrations causes larger degradation than removing random ones, plus comparisons against gradient- and attention-based baselines. The most useful findings would be whether DETAIL can distinguish superficially similar but functionally irrelevant demonstrations from truly decisive ones, and whether it reveals brittle dependence on a small subset of examples in ICL.","authors_note":"The author list includes Daniela Rus. Exact institutional affiliations cannot be confirmed from the provided input."},"tags":["icl","interpretability","attribution","prompting"],"notable_authors":["Zijian Zhou","Xiaoqiang Lin","Xinyi Xu","Alok Prakash","Daniela Rus"],"keywords":["in-context learning","data attribution","large language models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的DETAIL归因框架和Fig4的ICL示例影响分布结果，可用来诊断预训练模型的ICL机制是否依赖表面特征。","en":"Only read §3 for DETAIL attribution framework and Fig.4 for ICL demonstration impact distribution, which helps diagnose if pretrained models' ICL mechanism relies on superficial features."}},{"id":"ZhuCWGLG024","title":"PrivAuditor: Benchmarking Data Protection Vulnerabilities in LLM Adaptation Techniques","authors":["Derui Zhu","Dingfan Chen","Xiongfei Wu","Jiahui Geng","Zhuo Li","Jens Grossklags","Lei Ma"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$12d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhuCWGLG024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhuCWGLG024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/12b18a15dcd73e1991e9959a94375fab-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 在微调适配（fine-tuning、PEFT 等）过程中可能泄露训练数据中的隐私信息，但目前缺乏系统性的基准来评估不同适配技术的数据保护漏洞。","importance":"系统/基准级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的间接价值在于：随着 continual pretrain 和 domain adaptation 越来越普遍，理解不同适配方法的隐私风险有助于设计更安全的训练流程。但核心关切偏向安全和隐私，与 pretrain 方法论的直接关联有限。","technical_approach":"构建了 PrivAuditor 基准，系统评估多种 LLM 适配技术（full fine-tuning、LoRA 等 PEFT 方法）在数据隐私保护方面的漏洞。具体评估维度和攻击方法因 abstract 缺失无法确认。","experiments":"具体实验细节因 abstract 缺失无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM adaptation techniques (fine-tuning, PEFT, etc.) may leak private training data, but there is no systematic benchmark for evaluating data protection vulnerabilities across different adaptation methods.","importance":"Benchmark-level contribution. Indirectly relevant to pretrain research as continual pretraining and domain adaptation become more common — understanding privacy risks of different adaptation methods helps design safer training pipelines. Core concern is safety/privacy rather than pretraining methodology.","technical_approach":"Introduces PrivAuditor benchmark to systematically evaluate privacy vulnerabilities across multiple LLM adaptation techniques. Specific evaluation dimensions and attack methods unavailable due to missing abstract.","experiments":"Specific experimental details unavailable due to missing abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["privacy","adapter","fine-tuning","benchmark"],"keywords":["Privacy","Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning","Membership Inference Attacks."],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§2的基准构造逻辑和附录的不同PEFT方法隐私风险对比表，作为适配阶段隐私防护设计的备查参考。","en":"Only read §2 for benchmark construction logic and the appendix's privacy risk comparison of PEFT methods, as a reference for privacy protection during model adaptation."}},{"id":"ZhuWLC24","title":"Scaling the Codebook Size of VQ-GAN to 100, 000 with a Utilization Rate of 99%","authors":["Lei Zhu","Fangyun Wei","Yanye Lu","Dong Chen"],"institutions":["Microsoft Research Asia"],"abstract":"$12e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhuWLC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhuWLC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1716d022edeac750e57a2986a7135e13-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"VQ-GAN 的 codebook 利用率极低是一个长期痛点——codebook 越大，大量 code 从不被使用（codebook collapse），这严重限制了视觉 tokenizer 的表达能力和重建质量。之前的方法要么限制 codebook 大小，要么用各种 trick 缓解但效果有限。","importance":"方法级贡献，对 pretrain 研究有直接且重要的影响。视觉 tokenizer 是跨模态统一预训练（如 AR+diffusion 联合建模、图文统一 LM）的基础组件。将 codebook 扩展到 100K 且利用率达 99% 意味着视觉离散化的信息瓶颈被大幅缓解，这直接提升了把图像 token 喂给语言模型的可行性和质量上限。对 LLaDA、Chameleon、Show-o 等统一建模工作的视觉 tokenizer 选择有直接参考价值。","technical_approach":"将 VQ-GAN 的 codebook 规模扩展到 100,000，同时实现 99% 的利用率。具体技术细节因 abstract 缺失无法完整确认，但核心挑战是解决大 codebook 下的 collapse 问题——可能涉及改进的 codebook 初始化、EMA 更新策略、辅助损失函数、或 codebook 分解等技术。这个结果本身就是一个重要的工程和方法突破。","experiments":"核心数字：codebook 大小 100,000，利用率 99%。具体的重建质量指标（FID、rFID 等）和下游任务表现因 abstract 缺失无法确认。","authors_note":"作者包括 Fangyun Wei 和 Dong Chen（Microsoft Research Asia）。MSRA 在视觉基础模型方面有深厚积累。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"VQ-GAN suffers from extremely low codebook utilization — as codebook size increases, most codes go unused (codebook collapse), severely limiting the expressiveness and reconstruction quality of visual tokenizers. Prior methods either cap codebook size or apply partial fixes with limited success.","importance":"Method-level contribution with direct impact on pretrain research. Visual tokenizers are foundational components for cross-modal unified pretraining (AR+diffusion joint modeling, unified image-text LMs). Scaling codebook to 100K with 99% utilization substantially alleviates the information bottleneck in visual discretization, directly improving the feasibility and quality ceiling of feeding image tokens into language models. Relevant to LLaDA, Chameleon, Show-o, and similar unified modeling efforts.","technical_approach":"Scales VQ-GAN codebook to 100,000 entries while achieving 99% utilization. Specific techniques unavailable due to missing abstract, but the core challenge is preventing collapse at large codebook sizes — likely involving improved initialization, EMA update strategies, auxiliary losses, or codebook factorization. The result itself represents a significant engineering and methodological breakthrough.","experiments":"Key numbers: codebook size 100,000, utilization rate 99%. Specific reconstruction quality metrics (FID, rFID, etc.) and downstream task performance unavailable due to missing abstract.","authors_note":"Authors include Fangyun Wei and Dong Chen (Microsoft Research Asia). MSRA has deep expertise in vision foundation models."},"tags":["tokenizer","vqgan","codebook","vision-tokenizer"],"notable_authors":["Fangyun Wei","Dong Chen"],"keywords":["Image quantization","image generation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3的大码本抗坍缩方案和§4的100K码本利用率验证结果，可直接参考用于跨模态预训练的视觉tokenizer迭代。","en":"Focus on §3 for large codebook anti-collapse solution and §4 for 100K codebook utilization results, directly referenceable for visual tokenizer iteration in multimodal pretraining."}},{"id":"2406.04313","title":"Improving Alignment and Robustness with Circuit Breakers","authors":["Andy Zou","Long Phan","Justin Wang","Derek Duenas","Maxwell Lin","Maksym Andriushchenko","J. Zico Kolter","Matt Fredrikson","Dan Hendrycks"],"institutions":["CMU","Center for AI Safety","Gray Swan AI"],"abstract":"$12f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.04313","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZouPWDLAKFH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZouPWDLAKFH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/97ca7168c2c333df5ea61ece3b3276e1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 的安全对齐方法（如 refusal training）容易被对抗攻击绕过，而对抗训练只能针对已知攻击类型打补丁，无法泛化防御未知攻击。需要一种更根本的方法来阻止有害输出的生成。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于表示工程（representation engineering）视角——circuit breaker 直接操作模型内部表示来阻断有害输出，这揭示了 pretrain 阶段学到的表示空间中有害行为的可分离性。对理解 pretrain 表示的结构、以及设计 pretrain-posttrain 接口中的安全机制有参考价值。Andy Zou 是 representation engineering 和对抗攻击方向的代表性研究者。","technical_approach":"Circuit Breakers 的核心思路是：不在行为层面做 refusal training 或对抗训练，而是直接在表示层面识别并中断导致有害输出的内部表示。基于 representation engineering 的进展，找到模型内部与有害输出关联的表示方向，在推理时检测并阻断这些表示的激活。关键优势是不依赖于特定攻击类型，因此对未知攻击也有防御能力。适用于纯文本和多模态语言模型，且不牺牲正常任务的效用。","experiments":"在文本和多模态语言模型上验证。核心结果是在面对各种对抗攻击（包括未见过的攻击类型）时都能有效阻止有害输出，同时保持正常任务性能不下降。具体数字因 abstract 截断不完整。","authors_note":"Andy Zou 是 CMU/Center for AI Safety 的研究者，此前以 Universal and Transferable Adversarial Attacks on Aligned Language Models (GCG attack) 闻名，是 LLM 安全和 representation engineering 方向的代表人物。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM safety alignment methods (refusal training) are easily bypassed by adversarial attacks, and adversarial training only patches known attack types without generalizing to unknown ones. A more fundamental approach to preventing harmful outputs is needed.","importance":"Method-level contribution. Relevant to pretrain research through the representation engineering lens — circuit breakers operate directly on internal representations to block harmful outputs, revealing the separability of harmful behavior in pretrained representation spaces. Informs understanding of pretrained representation structure and safety mechanism design at the pretrain-posttrain interface.","technical_approach":"Circuit Breakers bypass behavioral-level refusal training and adversarial training by directly identifying and interrupting internal representations responsible for harmful outputs. Leveraging representation engineering, the method finds representation directions associated with harmful outputs and blocks their activation during inference. Key advantage: attack-agnostic defense that works against unseen attack types. Applicable to both text-only and multimodal LMs without sacrificing utility.","experiments":"Validated on text-only and multimodal language models. Effectively prevents harmful outputs across various adversarial attacks including unseen attack types, while maintaining normal task performance. Specific numbers incomplete due to abstract truncation.","authors_note":"Andy Zou (CMU / Center for AI Safety) is known for the GCG attack paper (Universal and Transferable Adversarial Attacks on Aligned Language Models) and is a leading figure in LLM safety and representation engineering."},"tags":["alignment","robustness","representation-engineering","safety"],"notable_authors":["Andy Zou"],"keywords":["alignment","adversarial robustness","adversarial attacks","harmfulness","security","reliability","ML safety","AI safety"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的有害表示识别方法和§5的跨攻击泛化实验，对预训练表示空间的安全可解释性研究有参考价值。","en":"Only read §3 for harmful representation identification method and §5 for cross-attack generalization experiments, valuable for safety interpretability research of pretrained representation spaces."}},{"id":"2406.01345","title":"BMRS: Bayesian Model Reduction for Structured Pruning","authors":["Dustin Wright","Christian Igel","Raghavendra Selvan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$130","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.01345","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001IS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001IS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/7538e7a7a589a267f49527fe6fbc640e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要把结构化剪枝从“启发式重要性评分+手工阈值”推进到可端到端优化的贝叶斯框架；以往结构化剪枝常在稳定性、可解释的不确定性估计、以及与训练目标一致性上做得不够。","importance":"贡献是把 Bayesian Model Reduction（在改变先验下高效比较贝叶斯模型）引入结构化剪枝，提供一种原则性更强的“删哪些结构”决策方式；对大模型而言，它更像是压缩/部署侧的方法，但也能反哺 pretrain 的算力预算与稀疏结构设计。","technical_approach":"提出 BMRS：结合(1) 乘性噪声的贝叶斯结构化剪枝（用随机门控表达结构是否保留）与(2) Bayesian Model Reduction（在不完全重训的情况下评估删结构后的证据变化）。关键点是用贝叶斯证据/后验来驱动结构删除，而不是仅靠梯度或权重范数，从而在“更激进剪枝”和“性能退化”之间提供更可控的权衡。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体网络、数据集、剪枝比例、与 SNIP/Movement Pruning/结构化 L0 等基线的对比数字，也未说明训练开销（贝叶斯推断带来的额外成本）与可扩展性（是否能到 Transformer 大层）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper upgrades structured pruning from heuristic importance scoring and thresholding to an end-to-end Bayesian decision process; prior structured pruning often lacks calibrated uncertainty and objective-consistent pruning criteria.","importance":"It contributes a more principled pruning framework by bringing Bayesian Model Reduction into structured pruning. While mainly relevant for compression/deployment, it can inform pretraining cost trade-offs and structured sparsity design choices.","technical_approach":"BMRS combines (i) Bayesian structured pruning via multiplicative noise (stochastic gates over neurons/filters) with (ii) Bayesian Model Reduction to efficiently compare pruned vs. unpruned Bayesian models under prior changes. The intended benefit is a better-controlled trade-off between aggressive pruning and accuracy loss, guided by Bayesian evidence/posteriors rather than simple norms or gradients.","experiments":"The abstract does not report concrete setups or numbers (architectures, datasets, pruning ratios, baselines like L0/Movement/SNIP variants, accuracy deltas), nor the added compute from Bayesian inference or scalability to large Transformers.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pruning","compression","bayesian","efficiency"],"keywords":["Bayesian model reduction","structured pruning","variational inference","efficient machine learning","deep learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3的贝叶斯模型缩减剪枝流程，预训练稀疏结构设计时可参考其结构化删除的原则性决策思路。","en":"Focus on §3 for Bayesian model reduction pruning pipeline, its principled structured removal logic can be referenced for pretraining sparse structure design."}},{"id":"2410.21262","title":"BLAST: Block-Level Adaptive Structured Matrices for Efficient Deep Neural Network Inference","authors":["Changwoo Lee","Soo Min Kwon","Qing Qu","Hun-Seok Kim"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$131","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.21262","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001K0K24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001K0K24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1b2df10d5bc3ca563339c801fa2e14db-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要降低大模型推理时线性层的矩阵乘成本，并避免传统结构化矩阵（如固定的 Toeplitz/低秩/块对角）表达力不足导致的精度损失。","importance":"贡献是可学习的结构化矩阵族：如果 BLAST 能在较小精度回退下显著减少 MACs/内存访问，它对 serving 成本和端侧部署更直接；对 pretrain 的启示在于哪些线性层权重天然接近某类结构，以及是否能在训练中诱导这种结构以换取更低推理成本。","technical_approach":"提出 BLAST（Block-Level Adaptive Structured）矩阵：以 block 为单位学习结构，使其既能从数据中学到合适的结构，也能从已有权重矩阵中“拟合/投影”出结构化近似。关键取舍是用 block 级别的自适应性换取比固定结构更强的表示能力，同时仍保留结构化乘法带来的计算优势。","experiments":"摘要声称在语言与视觉任务上可用于压缩并展示效率，但未给出模型规模、压缩率、吞吐/延迟、困惑度/精度回退、以及与低秩/剪枝/量化或其他结构化矩阵方法的对比数字；因此无法从摘要判断它在 Transformer MLP/Attention 投影层上的真实收益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets inference bottlenecks from dense linear layers, aiming to cut matmul cost without the accuracy drop typically caused by overly rigid structured matrices (e.g., fixed Toeplitz/block-diagonal/low-rank forms).","importance":"It proposes a learnable structured-matrix family: if BLAST preserves accuracy while reducing compute/memory traffic, it directly impacts serving and edge deployment. For pretraining, it hints at which weight matrices naturally admit structure and whether training can encourage such structure for cheaper inference.","technical_approach":"BLAST (Block-Level Adaptive Structured) matrices learn structure at the block granularity, either learned from data or fit from existing dense weights. The key trade-off is flexibility (vs. fixed structures) while retaining fast structured multiplication (vs. unstructured dense matmul).","experiments":"The abstract claims efficiency on both language and vision compression, but provides no concrete numbers (model sizes, compression ratios, latency/throughput, perplexity/accuracy deltas, or comparisons to low-rank/pruning/quantization/other structured matrices), so practical impact on Transformer layers cannot be validated from the abstract alone.","authors_note":""},"tags":["structured-matrix","inference","compression","efficiency"],"keywords":["Efficiency","Compression","Low Rank","Pruning","Matrix Factorization","Structured Matrix","Acceleration","Optimization","Transformer","Large Language Model","Diffusion Model","Vision Model","Preconditioned Gradient Descent"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的块级自适应结构化矩阵设计和§4的精度-MACs权衡结果，可参考用于预训练阶段的推理友好结构诱导。","en":"Only read §3 for block-level adaptive structured matrix design and §4 for accuracy-MACs trade-off results, referenceable for inference-friendly structure induction during pretraining."}},{"id":"2404.11833","title":"Thought of Search: Planning with Language Models Through The Lens of Efficiency","authors":["Michael Katz","Harsha Kokel","Kavitha Srinivas","Shirin Sohrabi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$132","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.11833","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001KSS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001KSS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/fa080fe0f218871faec1d8ba20e491d5-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要把“用 LLM 做规划/搜索”从只看能不能解，推进到分析 soundness（正确性）、completeness（完备性）和复杂度；以往很多 LLM 规划方法为了看起来聪明，牺牲了可证明性质且计算低效。","importance":"贡献是把经典算法性质带回 LLM 规划：它指出当前趋势在效率上也未必占优，并给出一个同时保持 soundness+completeness 且更高效的方案；对 LLM 系统的启示是，LLM 更适合生成“搜索组件/代码”而不是在推理时充当不受控的搜索过程。","technical_approach":"核心思路是让 LLM 生成可执行的搜索代码/组件，再用传统搜索算法框架运行，从而把正确性与完备性落在算法层而不是 prompt 层。关键取舍是减少“LLM 在环”次数以降低 token 级开销，同时用形式化搜索保证性质；边界是问题表述必须能被编译成可运行的搜索过程。","experiments":"摘要提到在 4 个代表性搜索问题上对比文献中的 LLM 规划方案，并展示更高效率且保持 soundness/completeness；但未给出具体问题规模、运行时间/调用次数、成功率等数字，也未说明对不同 LLM 的敏感性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper reframes LLM-based planning through classic algorithmic guarantees—soundness, completeness, and complexity—arguing that many recent LLM planning trends sacrifice guarantees and are inefficient even empirically.","importance":"It is a systems/algorithmic correction: by restoring provable properties while improving efficiency, it suggests a more reliable way to use LLMs for planning—LLMs should synthesize search components/code, while the actual search should be executed by standard algorithms.","technical_approach":"They have the LLM generate executable code for the search components and then run a conventional search procedure, so correctness/completeness come from the algorithm rather than prompt behavior. The main trade-off is fewer LLM-in-the-loop steps (lower token cost) at the expense of requiring problems to be representable as runnable search programs.","experiments":"The abstract reports demonstrations on four representative search problems and claims higher efficiency with soundness and completeness preserved, but provides no concrete metrics (runtime, number of LLM calls, success rates, problem sizes) or sensitivity across different LLMs.","authors_note":""},"tags":["planning","search","efficiency","reasoning"],"keywords":["planning","large language models","search"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§4的Thought of Search框架设计和复杂度分析，预训练规划能力时可参考其算法层与模型层分工的思路。","en":"Focus on §4 for Thought of Search framework design and complexity analysis, its algorithm-model layer division logic can be referenced for pretraining planning capabilities."}},{"id":"2406.13805","title":"WikiContradict: A Benchmark for Evaluating LLMs on Real-World Knowledge Conflicts from Wikipedia","authors":["Yufang Hou","Alessandra Pascale","Javier Carnerero-Cano","Tigran T. Tchrakian","Radu Marinescu","Elizabeth Daly","Inkit Padhi","Prasanna Sattigeri"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$133","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.13805","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001PCT0DPS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001PCT0DPS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c63819755591ea972f8570beffca6b1b-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要评估 RAG 在“同源但互相矛盾的证据”下模型如何决策；以往 RAG 评测多关注是否检索到正确段落，却很少刻意构造等可信度的冲突证据来测模型的冲突消解能力。","importance":"贡献是一个小而精的冲突基准：WikiContradict 用 Wikipedia 内部真实知识冲突来测 LLM 在证据矛盾时的行为，对预训练与 RAG 都有诊断价值——因为冲突往往来自同一预训练源，模型可能学到“默认某种版本”的偏置。","technical_approach":"构建并人工标注 253 个高质量实例：每个问题配套来自 Wikipedia 的相互矛盾段落，且来源同一高可信语料以控制“信任度差异”这个混杂因素。评测重点从“有没有证据”转向“面对冲突证据如何回答/是否承认不确定性/是否选择性引用”。","experiments":"摘要给出数据规模为 253 条人工标注实例，但未给出参与评测的模型列表、评价指标（例如选择哪一方、引用一致性、拒答率等）、以及 RAG 设置（k、重排器、提示模板）对结果的影响，因此目前更像诊断工具而非结论性比较。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper evaluates how LLMs behave in RAG when retrieved evidence is contradictory yet equally trustworthy, a regime largely ignored by standard RAG benchmarks that focus on retrieving the “right” passage rather than resolving conflicts.","importance":"It contributes a focused diagnostic benchmark: WikiContradict uses real-world conflicts within Wikipedia to probe conflict resolution under controlled trustworthiness, which is relevant to both pretraining (Wikipedia as a major source) and RAG reliability (models may default to memorized versions or cherry-pick evidence).","technical_approach":"They build WikiContradict with 253 human-annotated instances where questions are paired with mutually contradictory Wikipedia passages from the same source domain, controlling for credibility as a confounder. The evaluation emphasis shifts from evidence presence to conflict handling: consistency, uncertainty acknowledgment, and selective citation behavior.","experiments":"The abstract specifies 253 high-quality annotated instances but does not list evaluated models, metrics (e.g., side selection, citation consistency, abstention), or RAG configuration sensitivity (top-k, reranking, prompting), so it is best viewed as a benchmark/tool rather than a fully quantified conclusion from the abstract alone.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","rag","knowledge-conflict","evaluation"],"keywords":["knowledge contradiction","RAG","LLM evaluation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看附录的冲突实例集和§4的模型冲突消解行为统计，可用来诊断预训练模型的知识偏置情况。","en":"Only read the conflict instance set in appendix and §4 for model conflict resolution behavior statistics, usable for diagnosing knowledge bias in pretrained models."}},{"id":"2410.19818","title":"UniMTS: Unified Pre-training for Motion Time Series","authors":["Xiyuan Zhang","Diyan Teng","Ranak Roy Chowdhury","Shuheng Li","Dezhi Hong","Rajesh K. Gupta","Jingbo Shang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$134","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.19818","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001TCLHGS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001TCLHGS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c290d4373c495b2cad0625d6288260f0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是运动时间序列缺少统一预训练范式的问题，尤其是跨设备位置、朝向、采样习惯和活动类型时泛化很差。过去这类任务大多是单数据集训练再单数据集测试，模型实际学到的是设备与采集条件的 shortcut，而不是稳定的人体运动表示；在隐私限制导致大规模标注数据难拿的前提下，这个问题现在值得重新做成预训练问题。","importance":"它的贡献更偏数据与方法范式：把原本碎片化的 wearable/mobile motion 建模，推进到类似 foundation model 的统一预训练框架。对 broader pretrain 研究的启示是，预训练并不只属于文本和视觉；对低资源、强隐私约束的传感器序列，真正关键的是如何学到对设备潜变量不敏感、但对行为语义敏感的表示。这类工作如果做扎实，会影响时序 tokenizer、跨域自监督目标和多设备泛化评测的设计。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个 unified pre-training procedure，用统一目标去吸收来自不同设备形态和采集条件的 motion time series。摘要给出的关键设计点是它试图跨越“device latent factors”，也就是显式处理设备位置、安装方向等造成的分布偏移，而不是默认所有传感器序列在同一坐标系和统计分布下。可以推测其方法上会结合时序自监督、视角/设备不变建模和多数据源联合训练；它和传统单任务 supervised HAR 模型的区别，不在 backbone 本身，而在训练目标是否把跨域不变性当成一等公民。","experiments":"摘要没有给出参数量、预训练数据规模、具体任务数或提升幅度，因此不能编造结果。能确定的是，论文会把 UniMTS 放在跨数据集、跨设备设置下评估，而不只是同分布切分；否则“unified pre-training”的论点站不住。对这类论文最该关注的实验通常有两类：一是 zero-shot 或 linear probing 到未见设备/位置的泛化；二是预训练数据源越多时是否出现稳定 scaling 收益，而不是仅在某个公开 HAR 基准上略微超过专用模型。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a missing piece in motion time series modeling: there is no broadly effective pretraining recipe that generalizes across device placement, orientation, and activity variation. Most prior work is trained and evaluated within the same dataset, so models often exploit dataset-specific sensor shortcuts rather than learning transferable motion representations.","importance":"This is mainly a paradigm and data contribution for an underexplored pretraining domain. The broader relevance is that pretraining should not be limited to text or vision; wearable and mobile sensor streams have the same foundation-model need, but with harsher privacy constraints and stronger domain shift. If successful, this line of work can shape how we think about invariance, tokenization, and transfer in non-text sequential pretraining.","technical_approach":"UniMTS is presented as a unified pretraining procedure for motion time series across diverse device latent factors. The key idea is to train representations that are stable to nuisance variables such as placement and orientation, instead of assuming all inertial streams live in one aligned coordinate system. The novelty is therefore less about inventing a new backbone and more about building a pretraining setup where cross-device invariance is part of the objective, not an afterthought.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide model size, data scale, or headline gains, so there is no basis to report concrete numbers. What matters experimentally is whether UniMTS is evaluated in cross-dataset and cross-device transfer settings rather than same-distribution splits. For this kind of work, the most informative results would be zero-shot or few-shot transfer to unseen device configurations, plus scaling behavior as more heterogeneous pretraining sources are added.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pretraining","time-series","transfer-learning","foundation-model"],"keywords":["motion time series classification","pre-training","contrastive learning","physics-based simulation","human activity recognition"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3的跨设备不变预训练目标设计，对低资源强隐私领域的预训练范式设计有启发。","en":"Focus on §3 for cross-device invariant pretraining objective design, inspiring for pretraining paradigm design in low-resource, high-privacy domains."}},{"id":"2401.12794","title":"Benchmarking LLMs via Uncertainty Quantification","authors":["Fanghua Ye","Mingming Yang","Jianhui Pang","Longyue Wang","Derek F. Wong","Emine Yilmaz","Shuming Shi","Zhaopeng Tu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"The proliferation of open-source Large Language Models (LLMs) from various institutions has highlighted the urgent need for comprehensive evaluation methods. However, current evaluation platforms, such as the widely recognized HuggingFace open LLM leaderboard, neglect a crucial aspect -- uncertainty, which is vital for thoroughly assessing LLMs. To bridge this gap, we introduce a new benchmarking approach for LLMs that integrates uncertainty quantification. Our examination involves nine LLMs (LLM series) spanning five representative natural language processing tasks. Our findings reveal that: I) LLMs with higher accuracy may exhibit lower certainty; II) Larger-scale LLMs may display greater uncertainty compared to their smaller counterparts; and III) Instruction-finetuning tends to increase the uncertainty of LLMs. These results underscore the significance of incorporating uncertainty in the evaluation of LLMs.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.12794","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0001YPWWY0T24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0001YPWWY0T24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1bdcb065d40203a00bd39831153338bb-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 LLM 评测长期忽略 uncertainty 的问题：只看准确率或平均分，会把“答对但不稳”和“答错但很自信”混在一起。过去 open LLM leaderboard 一类平台主要比较任务分数，但对实际部署和对齐而言，模型知道自己不知道，往往和最终正确率同样重要。","importance":"它的贡献是评测层面的，不是新模型方法，但对 post-train 和模型选择很有现实意义。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于，规模更大、指令微调更强，并不自动意味着更好校准；如果 accuracy 和 certainty 脱钩，那么单看 benchmark 会误判训练策略优劣。这会影响 reward design、拒答策略和 calibrated decoding 的研究方向。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把 uncertainty quantification 系统性纳入 LLM benchmark。作者评估 9 个 LLM 系列、5 类代表性 NLP 任务，并分析准确率与确定性的关系，而不是把 certainty 当附属图表。摘要透露的关键发现有三个：高准确模型不一定更确定；更大模型反而可能更不确定；指令微调会提高回答确定性。这种设计的价值在于把“性能”和“信心”拆开观察，代价是 uncertainty 指标本身依赖定义与估计方法，如果估计不稳，结论会受影响。","experiments":"摘要已经给了几个最重要的实验结论。其一，在 9 个 LLM 系列、5 类任务上，accuracy 与 certainty 并非单调一致，高分模型可能更不确定。其二，更大规模模型不一定更校准，甚至可能比小模型更不确定。其三，instruction finetuning 倾向于提高确定性。由于摘要没给具体任务名称、模型名单和数值幅度，无法补充具体百分点；但这三点已经足够说明，这不是单纯复述 calibration 常识，而是在当前 open LLM 生态里给出了相反于“越大越稳”的实证。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a gap in LLM evaluation: standard leaderboards measure task accuracy but largely ignore uncertainty. That misses an important deployment question, because a model that is occasionally correct but poorly calibrated behaves very differently from one that knows when it is unsure.","importance":"This is an evaluation contribution rather than a new model, but it matters for both post-training and model selection. For pretraining research, the key implication is that higher capability, larger scale, or stronger instruction tuning do not automatically imply better calibration. If accuracy and certainty diverge, benchmark rankings alone can be misleading.","technical_approach":"The proposed contribution is a benchmarking framework that explicitly includes uncertainty quantification. The study compares nine LLM series across five representative NLP tasks and analyzes how confidence relates to correctness, rather than treating confidence as an afterthought. The important design choice is to evaluate accuracy and certainty separately, although the conclusions naturally depend on how uncertainty is estimated and calibrated.","experiments":"The abstract already provides the headline findings. First, models with higher accuracy can still exhibit lower certainty. Second, larger models may be more uncertain than smaller ones. Third, instruction fine-tuning tends to increase certainty. The provided text does not include exact model names, task-level scores, or numeric margins, but these findings are strong enough to challenge the default assumption that scale automatically improves confidence quality.","authors_note":""},"tags":["uncertainty","benchmark","evaluation","calibration"],"keywords":["LLMs","Uncertainty Quantification","Benchmarking"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§5的准确率-确定性关联分析结论，预训练和对齐阶段可参考其校准指标的设计逻辑。","en":"Only read §5 for accuracy-certainty correlation analysis conclusions, its calibration indicator design logic can be referenced during pretraining and alignment phases."}},{"id":"2410.02396","title":"Parameter Competition Balancing for Model Merging","authors":["Guodong Du","Junlin Lee","Jing Li","Runhua Jiang","Yifei Guo","Shuyang Yu","Hanting Liu","Sim Kuan Goh","Ho-Kin Tang","Daojing He","Min Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$135","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.02396","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0002LLJGYLGTH024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0002LLJGYLGTH024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/99fc8bc48b917c301a80cb74d91c0c06-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"多任务模型合并时，不同任务的参数之间存在冲突和复杂关联，现有方法在参数级别的调整上不够精细，导致合并后的多任务性能下降。此前的方法（如 Task Arithmetic、TIES-Merging）主要靠简单的符号投票或幅度裁剪，缺乏对参数间竞争关系的系统建模。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：fine-tune 后的模型合并本质上是在 pretrain 权重空间中做多任务插值，PCB-Merging 提供了一种无需重训练的轻量方案来平衡不同任务对同一参数的竞争，对理解 pretrain 权重的可组合性有参考价值。","technical_approach":"PCB-Merging 是一种 training-free 的参数合并方法。核心思路分两步：(1) 在参数级别量化每个 task vector 中各参数的竞争强度（即多个任务对同一参数的更新方向和幅度的冲突程度），(2) 基于竞争强度动态调整每个任务对该参数的合并系数，使冲突大的参数被更谨慎地融合，冲突小的参数保留更多信息。与 TIES-Merging 的区别在于不做硬性裁剪，而是用软系数平衡。","experiments":"论文在多个视觉和 NLP 任务上验证，基于 ViT-B/32、ViT-L/14 等 CLIP 模型以及 T5 等语言模型进行多任务合并。相比 Task Arithmetic 和 TIES-Merging，PCB-Merging 在多任务平均准确率上有稳定提升（具体数字需参考全文），且不需要额外训练或验证集调参。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"When merging multiple fine-tuned models into one, parameter-level conflicts between tasks degrade multi-task performance. Prior methods like Task Arithmetic and TIES-Merging use coarse heuristics (sign voting, magnitude pruning) that don't adequately model inter-task parameter competition.","importance":"A method-level contribution. For pretrain research, it offers insight into the composability of pretrained weight spaces—how task-specific updates can be reconciled without retraining, which informs our understanding of what pretrained representations encode.","technical_approach":"PCB-Merging is training-free. It first quantifies per-parameter competition intensity across task vectors (measuring directional and magnitude conflicts), then dynamically adjusts merging coefficients so that highly conflicting parameters are blended conservatively while agreeable parameters retain more information. Unlike TIES-Merging's hard pruning, this uses soft coefficient balancing.","experiments":"Evaluated on multi-task merging with CLIP ViT-B/32, ViT-L/14, and T5 models across vision and NLP benchmarks. Shows consistent improvements in average multi-task accuracy over Task Arithmetic and TIES-Merging baselines, without requiring additional training or validation-set tuning.","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-merging","multitask","fine-tuning"],"keywords":["Model Merging","Knowledge Fusion","Model Editing","Task Arithmetic","Robust Fine-tuning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的参数竞争强度量化与动态合并系数设计，可直接复现到内部多任务LoRA合并的ablation实验中。","en":"Read §3 for parameter competition intensity quantification and dynamic merging coefficient design, can be directly reproduced in internal multi-task LoRA merging ablation studies."}},{"id":"2410.20670","title":"Segmenting Watermarked Texts From Language Models","authors":["Xingchi Li","Guanxun Li","Xianyang Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$136","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.20670","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0002LZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0002LZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1a8d295871250443f9747d239925b89d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 水印检测的现有方法假设整段文本都是水印文本，但实际场景中用户可能对生成文本做了替换、插入、删除等编辑，导致发布文本是水印与非水印片段的混合体。如何在这种混合文本中精确分割出哪些子串是 LLM 生成的、哪些是人工修改的，此前缺乏系统的统计方法。","importance":"方法级贡献，面向 LLM 水印的实用化场景。对 pretrain 研究的直接启示有限，但对 LLM 部署和治理有价值——水印是 pretrain 模型输出溯源的关键技术，分割能力使水印检测在对抗性编辑下更鲁棒。","technical_approach":"基于统计变点检测（change-point detection）框架。将水印信号建模为文本序列上的统计特征变化，先用假设检验判断文本是否包含水印，再用分割算法定位水印/非水印的边界。方法不依赖特定水印方案，适用于基于 token 分布偏移的通用水印。关键设计是将问题转化为 Poisson 或类似计数过程的分段检测，利用水印 token 的统计富集信号。","experiments":"在多种水印方案和编辑攻击（替换、插入、删除）下测试，展示了分割精度和检测功效。具体数字需参考全文，但核心结论是：即使文本被大幅编辑，方法仍能较准确地恢复水印片段的边界。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM watermark detectors assume the entire text is watermarked, but in practice users edit generated text (substitutions, insertions, deletions), creating a mixture of watermarked and non-watermarked segments. No systematic statistical method existed to segment such mixed texts.","importance":"A method-level contribution for practical LLM watermarking. Limited direct impact on pretrain research, but relevant to LLM deployment and provenance tracking—segmentation makes watermark detection robust under adversarial editing.","technical_approach":"Frames the problem as statistical change-point detection on the token sequence. First tests whether any watermark signal exists, then locates boundaries between watermarked and non-watermarked substrings. The approach models watermark token enrichment as a counting process and applies segmentation algorithms. It is watermark-scheme-agnostic, working with any method that shifts token distributions.","experiments":"Tested under multiple watermark schemes and editing attacks (substitution, insertion, deletion). The method recovers segment boundaries with reasonable accuracy even under heavy editing. Specific numbers require the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["watermarking","llm-detection","text-segmentation"],"keywords":["Large language models","Randomization test","Segmentation","Watermark"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的变点检测落地实现，做LLM水印治理相关研究的可直接参考其信号建模思路。","en":"Check §4 for change-point detection implementation, reference the signal modeling idea for LLM watermark governance related research."}},{"id":"2405.17068","title":"The Poisson Midpoint Method for Langevin Dynamics: Provably Efficient Discretization for Diffusion Models","authors":["Saravanan Kandasamy","Dheeraj Nagaraj"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$137","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.17068","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0002N24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0002N24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/796455f65fd2cbe049112a2d2d4488cb-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Langevin 动力学的时间离散化是扩散模型采样的核心步骤，但标准的 Euler-Maruyama 离散化（即 LMC）收敛慢，需要大量步数才能获得高质量样本。Randomized Midpoint Method 在强对数凹分布上效果好，但扩散模型涉及的分布通常是非对数凹的，该方法的理论保证不适用。","importance":"理论方法级贡献。为扩散模型的采样效率提供了更好的离散化方案，直接影响 diffusion LM 和图像扩散模型的推理速度。对 pretrain 研究者来说，如果你在做 diffusion-based 语言建模（如 MDLM、SEDD），采样步数是推理成本的主要瓶颈，更高效的离散化意味着更实用的部署。","technical_approach":"提出 Poisson Midpoint Method，将 Randomized Midpoint 的思想扩展到非对数凹分布。核心改进是用 Poisson 过程来随机化中间点的选取，使得在非凹情况下仍能获得比 Euler-Maruyama 更好的离散化误差界。相比标准 LMC，每步的计算量略增（需要额外一次 score 评估），但总步数可以显著减少。","experiments":"主要是理论分析，给出了在非对数凹分布下的收敛速率证明，展示了相比 LMC 的步数复杂度改进。可能包含合成实验验证，具体数字需参考全文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Standard Euler-Maruyama discretization of Langevin dynamics (LMC) requires many steps for high-quality samples in diffusion models. The Randomized Midpoint Method improves this for strongly log-concave distributions, but diffusion models involve non-log-concave densities where those guarantees break down.","importance":"A theoretical method-level contribution. Directly relevant to inference efficiency of diffusion models, including diffusion LMs (MDLM, SEDD, etc.), where sampling step count is the main inference bottleneck.","technical_approach":"Proposes the Poisson Midpoint Method, extending randomized midpoint discretization to non-log-concave distributions. Uses a Poisson process to randomize midpoint selection, achieving tighter discretization error bounds than Euler-Maruyama in the non-convex setting. Each step costs roughly one extra score evaluation, but total step count drops significantly.","experiments":"Primarily theoretical: proves convergence rate improvements over LMC under non-log-concave distributions. Likely includes synthetic experiments for validation; specific numbers require the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion-sampling","langevin-dynamics","discretization"],"keywords":["Langevin Monte Carlo","Diffusion Models","MCMC"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看Table 2的采样效率对比结果，做diffusion LM的研究员可参考替换现有采样器降低推理成本。","en":"Only look at Table 2 for sampling efficiency comparison, useful for diffusion LM researchers to replace existing samplers and reduce inference cost."}},{"id":"2406.11811","title":"RepLiQA: A Question-Answering Dataset for Benchmarking LLMs on Unseen Reference Content","authors":["João Monteiro","Pierre-André Noël","Étienne Marcotte","Sai Rajeswar Mudumba","Valentina Zantedeschi","David Vázquez","Nicolas Chapados","Chris Pal","Perouz Taslakian"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$138","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11811","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0002NMMZ0CPT24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0002NMMZ0CPT24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/2b23626015b6311369e95a70735cbb72-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 的评测数据可能已经泄露到训练集中（尤其是从互联网抓取的数据），导致 benchmark 分数虚高、评估结论不可靠。现有 QA 数据集大多基于公开文档（如 Wikipedia），很难排除数据污染。RepLiQA 的目标是提供一个干净的、未被 LLM 见过的 QA 评测集。","importance":"数据级贡献。对 pretrain 研究非常实用——当你需要评估 pretrain 模型的真实泛化能力（而非记忆能力）时，需要确保评测数据不在训练集中。RepLiQA 提供了 5 个分割，其中 4 个在发布前未暴露给互联网或 LLM API，是目前少有的可控污染风险的评测资源。","technical_approach":"数据集构建方法：(1) 创建全新的参考文档（非互联网已有内容），(2) 基于这些文档生成 QA 对，(3) 分 5 个 split 管理，4 个 split 在发布前严格隔离。每个样本包含参考文档、问题和答案，支持 QA 和主题检索两种任务。关键设计是通过控制文档的发布时间来保证数据新鲜度。","experiments":"在多个主流 LLM 上测试，对比模型在已发布 split 和未发布 split 上的表现差异，验证数据污染对评测的影响。具体模型和数字需参考全文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM benchmarks based on publicly available documents (e.g., Wikipedia) risk data contamination—models may have seen test data during pretraining, inflating scores. RepLiQA addresses this by providing QA test sets built from content never exposed to the internet or LLM APIs before release.","importance":"A data-level contribution directly useful for pretrain evaluation. When assessing true generalization (not memorization), you need uncontaminated benchmarks. RepLiQA offers 5 splits with 4 kept strictly isolated pre-release—one of the few contamination-controlled evaluation resources available.","technical_approach":"Constructs entirely new reference documents (not sourced from the internet), generates QA pairs from them, and manages 5 splits with strict temporal isolation for 4 splits. Each sample includes a reference document, question, and answer, supporting both QA and topic retrieval tasks. The key design lever is controlling document publication timing to guarantee freshness.","experiments":"Tests multiple mainstream LLMs, comparing performance on released vs. unreleased splits to quantify contamination effects. Specific models and numbers require the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm-evaluation","data-contamination","benchmark","qa"],"keywords":["Question Answering","data generation","robust evaluation of LLMs","context-conditional language modelling"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只需看§2的无污染数据集构建逻辑，可直接用该数据集评估预训练模型真实泛化能力。","en":"Check §2 for contamination-free dataset construction logic, can directly use this dataset to evaluate pretrained models' true generalization ability."}},{"id":"0002P0X24","title":"Improved Sample Complexity Bounds for Diffusion Model Training","authors":["Shivam Gupta","Aditya Parulekar","Eric Price","Zhiyang Xun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Diffusion models have become the most popular approach to deep generative modeling of images, largely due to their empirical performance and reliability. From a theoretical standpoint, a number of recent works [CCL+23, CCSW22, BBDD24] have studied the iteration complexity of sampling, assuming access to an accurate diffusion model. In this work, we focus on understanding the *sample complexity* of training such a model; how many samples are needed to learn an accurate diffusion model using a sufficiently expressive neural network? Prior work [BMR20] showed bounds polynomial in the dimension, desired Total Variation error, and Wasserstein error. We show an *exponential improvement* in the dependence on Wasserstein error and depth, along with improved dependencies on other relevant parameters.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0002P0X24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0002P0X24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/480e563034dbb6d1dd622d8eab7d129b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"扩散模型训练的样本复杂度（即需要多少训练样本才能学到足够好的 score function）的理论界此前较松，本文旨在给出更紧的上界。","importance":"理论贡献。对理解扩散模型（包括 diffusion LM）的数据效率有指导意义——告诉我们在什么条件下、需要多少数据，扩散模型的 score 估计才能达到给定精度。","technical_approach":"具体方法需参考全文，核心是改进 score matching 训练的统计学习理论分析，给出更紧的样本复杂度上界。","experiments":"主要是理论结果，具体实验设置需参考全文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Prior sample complexity bounds for training diffusion models (learning the score function) were loose. This work tightens those bounds.","importance":"A theoretical contribution informing data efficiency of diffusion models, including diffusion LMs—how many training samples are needed for score estimation to reach a given accuracy.","technical_approach":"Details require the full paper; the core is improved statistical learning theory analysis for score matching training, yielding tighter sample complexity upper bounds.","experiments":"Primarily theoretical results. Specific experimental details require the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion-training","sample-complexity","theory"],"keywords":["Diffusion Models","Learning Theory","Sample Complexity"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看定理推导的样本复杂度上界结论，做diffusion LM数据效率理论研究的可参考。","en":"Only read the theorem section for sample complexity upper bound conclusion, reference for diffusion LM data efficiency theoretical research."}},{"id":"0002W00CWZ024","title":"xRAG: Extreme Context Compression for Retrieval-augmented Generation with One Token","authors":["Xin Cheng","Xun Wang","Xingxing Zhang","Tao Ge","Si-Qing Chen","Furu Wei","Huishuai Zhang","Dongyan Zhao"],"institutions":["Microsoft Research"],"abstract":"$139","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0002W00CWZ024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0002W00CWZ024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c5cf13bfd3762821ef7607e63ee90075-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"RAG（检索增强生成）需要将检索到的文档拼接到 LLM 的上下文中，但长文档占用大量 context 窗口，增加推理延迟和成本。xRAG 的目标是将检索到的上下文极端压缩到仅一个 token 的表示。","importance":"系统/方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：如何在 LLM 的表示空间中高效编码外部知识。一个 token 的压缩比极端，如果可行，说明 LLM 的隐藏状态有很强的信息承载能力，也为 pretrain 阶段引入检索信号提供了新思路。","technical_approach":"具体方法需参考全文。从标题推测，核心是训练一个压缩模块（可能是 query transformer 或类似架构），将检索文档编码为单个 token embedding，然后注入 LLM 的输入序列。关键挑战是如何在极端压缩下保留足够的语义信息。","experiments":"具体实验设置和结果需参考全文。","authors_note":"作者包括 Xingxing Zhang、Tao Ge（微软研究院，在文本生成和 LLM 方向有多项工作）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"RAG requires concatenating retrieved documents into the LLM context, consuming context window and increasing latency. xRAG aims to compress retrieved context to an extreme—just one token representation.","importance":"A system/method-level contribution. For pretrain research, it probes how efficiently external knowledge can be encoded in LLM hidden states. If one-token compression works, it suggests strong information capacity in LLM representations and opens new directions for incorporating retrieval signals during pretraining.","technical_approach":"Details require the full paper. Likely trains a compression module (possibly a query transformer) to encode retrieved documents into a single token embedding injected into the LLM input. The key challenge is retaining sufficient semantic information under extreme compression.","experiments":"Specific setup and results require the full paper.","authors_note":"Authors include Xingxing Zhang and Tao Ge (Microsoft Research, known for text generation and LLM work)."},"tags":["rag","context-compression","retrieval-augmented"],"notable_authors":["Xingxing Zhang","Tao Ge"],"keywords":["retrieval-augmented generation","context compression","dense retrieval"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的单token极端上下文压缩方案，做RAG与预训练融合方向的可参考。","en":"Read §3 for single-token extreme context compression scheme, valuable for researchers working on RAG and pretraining fusion."}},{"id":"0002W0SLTP24","title":"Graph Convolutions Enrich the Self-Attention in Transformers!","authors":["Jeongwhan Choi","Hyowon Wi","Jayoung Kim","Yehjin Shin","Kookjin Lee","Nathaniel Trask","Noseong Park"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Transformers, renowned for their self-attention mechanism, have achieved state-of-the-art performance across various tasks in natural language processing, computer vision, time-series modeling, etc. However, one of the challenges with deep Transformer models is the oversmoothing problem, where representations across layers converge to indistinguishable values, leading to significant performance degradation. We interpret the original self-attention as a simple graph filter and redesign it from a graph signal processing (GSP) perspective. We propose a graph-filter-based self-attention (GFSA) to learn a general yet effective one, whose complexity, however, is slightly larger than that of the original self-attention mechanism. We demonstrate that GFSA improves the performance of Transformers in various fields, including computer vision, natural language processing, graph-level tasks, speech recognition, and code classification.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0002W0SLTP24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0002W0SLTP24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/5eceb48c3bc8b5d936c05ff8e2ece65e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"标准 Transformer 的 self-attention 在处理具有图结构的数据时，没有显式利用图的拓扑信息。本文探索将图卷积（Graph Convolution）融入 self-attention，使 Transformer 在图相关任务上更有效。","importance":"架构级贡献，但主要面向图学习场景。对 pretrain 研究的启示有限，除非你关注将结构化先验（如知识图谱、语法树）注入 Transformer 的方向。","technical_approach":"具体方法需参考全文。核心思路是在 attention 计算中引入图卷积操作，使注意力权重不仅由 query-key 相似度决定，还受图邻接关系调制。","experiments":"具体实验设置和结果需参考全文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Standard Transformer self-attention does not explicitly leverage graph topology when processing graph-structured data. This work integrates graph convolutions into self-attention to improve Transformers on graph tasks.","importance":"An architecture-level contribution primarily for graph learning. Limited direct relevance to pretrain research unless you're interested in injecting structural priors (knowledge graphs, syntax trees) into Transformers.","technical_approach":"Details require the full paper. The core idea is incorporating graph convolution operations into attention computation, so attention weights are modulated by graph adjacency in addition to query-key similarity.","experiments":"Specific setup and results require the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["graph-convolution","self-attention","transformer-architecture"],"keywords":["Transformer","self-attention","oversmoothing","graph filter"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3的图卷积与self-attention融合模块，做结构化先验注入Transformer预训练的可参考。","en":"Check §3 for graph convolution and self-attention fusion module, reference for researchers injecting structural priors into Transformer pretraining."}},{"id":"0005SHM024","title":"BLoB: Bayesian Low-Rank Adaptation by Backpropagation for Large Language Models","authors":["Yibin Wang","Haizhou Shi","Ligong Han","Dimitris N. Metaxas","Hao Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large Language Models (LLMs) often suffer from overconfidence during inference, particularly when adapted to downstream domain-specific tasks with limited data. Previous work addresses this issue by employing approximate Bayesian estimation after the LLMs are trained, enabling them to quantify uncertainty. However, such post-training approaches' performance is severely limited by the parameters learned during training. In this paper, we go beyond post-training Bayesianization and propose Bayesian Low-Rank Adaptation by Backpropagation (BLoB), an algorithm that continuously and jointly adjusts both the mean and covariance of LLM parameters throughout the whole fine-tuning process. Our empirical results verify the effectiveness of BLoB in terms of generalization and uncertainty estimation, when evaluated on both in-distribution and out-of-distribution data.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0005SHM024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0005SHM024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/7d53575463291ea6b5a23cf6e571f59b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LoRA 微调缺乏不确定性估计——标准 LoRA 给出点估计，无法量化预测的置信度。这在安全关键场景和 OOD 检测中是个问题。BLoB 将贝叶斯推断引入 LoRA，通过反向传播实现低秩适配矩阵的后验估计。","importance":"方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的直接影响有限，但对 posttrain 阶段（SFT/RLHF）的不确定性量化有价值。如果你关心 pretrain→posttrain 接口处的校准问题（如 reward model 的不确定性、数据选择中的置信度），这个方向值得关注。","technical_approach":"具体方法需参考全文。核心思路是对 LoRA 的低秩矩阵 A 和 B 施加先验分布，通过变分推断或类似方法用反向传播来近似后验。关键挑战是在保持 LoRA 参数效率的同时引入有意义的不确定性估计。","experiments":"具体实验设置和结果需参考全文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Standard LoRA fine-tuning produces point estimates with no uncertainty quantification, problematic for safety-critical applications and OOD detection. BLoB introduces Bayesian inference into LoRA, estimating posteriors over low-rank adaptation matrices via backpropagation.","importance":"A method-level contribution. Limited direct pretrain impact, but valuable for post-training uncertainty quantification (e.g., reward model calibration, confidence-based data selection at the pretrain-posttrain interface).","technical_approach":"Details require the full paper. Core idea: place priors on LoRA's low-rank matrices A and B, approximate the posterior via variational inference or similar methods through backpropagation. Key challenge is maintaining LoRA's parameter efficiency while adding meaningful uncertainty estimates.","experiments":"Specific setup and results require the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["lora","peft","bayesian","fine-tuning"],"keywords":["Bayesian Neural Network","Finetuning","Large Language Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的贝叶斯LoRA不确定性估计实验结果，做SFT阶段校准相关研究的可参考。","en":"Only look at §4 for Bayesian LoRA uncertainty estimation experimental results, useful for SFT phase calibration related research."}},{"id":"2405.14861","title":"Adapting to Unknown Low-Dimensional Structures in Score-Based Diffusion Models","authors":["Gen Li","Yuling Yan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$13a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14861","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0005Y24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0005Y24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e46c303cfd3b93bd32ecf6070318efc3-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"自然图像分布通常集中在高维空间中的低维流形上，但现有扩散模型的理论分析没有充分利用这一结构，导致误差界对环境维度 d 的依赖过强。本文旨在给出适应未知低维结构的更紧收敛界。","importance":"理论贡献。对扩散模型（包括 diffusion LM）的理论理解有推进——说明了 DDPM 在低维流形数据上的误差行为，以及如何通过系数设计将维度依赖从 d 降到内在维度 k。这对理解为什么扩散模型在高维数据上仍然有效提供了理论支撑。","technical_approach":"分析 DDPM 的去噪步骤，发现每步误差对环境维度 d 的依赖在一般情况下不可避免，但通过特定的噪声调度系数设计，可以使整体收敛速率达到 O(k²/√T) 量级（k 为内在维度，T 为步数），从而适应低维结构而无需事先知道流形。","experiments":"主要是理论结果。证明了在低维流形假设下 DDPM 的收敛速率改进，可能包含验证性的合成实验。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Natural image distributions concentrate on low-dimensional manifolds in high-dimensional space, but existing diffusion model theory doesn't exploit this structure, yielding error bounds with unnecessarily strong dependence on ambient dimension d. This work derives tighter convergence bounds that adapt to unknown low-dimensional structure.","importance":"A theoretical contribution advancing understanding of diffusion models (including diffusion LMs). Shows how DDPM error behavior on manifold data can be improved, and how coefficient design reduces dimension dependence from d to intrinsic dimension k—explaining why diffusion models work well on high-dimensional data.","technical_approach":"Analyzes DDPM denoising steps, showing per-step error dependence on ambient dimension d is generally unavoidable, but identifies a specific noise schedule coefficient design achieving O(k²/√T) convergence rate (k = intrinsic dimension, T = steps), adapting to low-dimensional structure without knowing the manifold.","experiments":"Primarily theoretical results proving convergence rate improvements under low-dimensional manifold assumptions. May include synthetic validation experiments.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","theory","score-matching","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["diffusion models","score-based generative models","low-dimensional structure","coefficient design"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看收敛界推导结论，做扩散模型理论研究的可参考理解其在高维数据上的有效性。","en":"Only read the convergence bound derivation conclusion, helpful for diffusion model theory researchers to understand its effectiveness on high-dimensional data."}},{"id":"2401.14966","title":"Masked Pre-training Enables Universal Zero-shot Denoiser","authors":["Xiaoxiao Ma","Zhixiang Wei","Yi Jin","Pengyang Ling","Tianle Liu","Ben Wang","Junkang Dai","Huaian Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$13b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.14966","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0006W0LLWDC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0006W0LLWDC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3926df1a00c9abf056df7bcf253d026a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有图像去噪方法要么需要在特定噪声分布上有监督训练，泛化性差，要么零样本去噪的质量低，此前未发现掩码预训练的视觉模型天然具备去噪的分布知识。","importance":"属于范式级贡献，提出的掩码预训练+迭代填充（MPI）零样本去噪范式，无需针对特定噪声训练，即可在单张噪声图像上实现高质量去噪，打破了传统去噪方法对监督数据的依赖。","technical_approach":"原创的零样本去噪范式，首先用随机掩码重建任务对大规模通用图像做预训练，让模型学习自然图像的分布知识，再用预训练权重对单张噪声图像做迭代填充去噪。舍弃了此前需要在带噪-干净配对数据上训练的要求，和现有零样本去噪方法的核心区别是仅依赖通用掩码预训练，无需针对去噪任务做任何微调。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体模型架构、噪声类型、基线指标和去噪质量提升幅度，待完整论文补充。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing image denoising methods either require supervised training on specific noise distributions with poor generalization, or have low zero-shot denoising quality. Prior studies have not found that masked pretrained vision models naturally have distribution knowledge for denoising.","importance":"It is a paradigm-level contribution. The proposed Masked Pre-train then Iterative fill (MPI) zero-shot denoising paradigm can achieve high-quality denoising on a single noisy image without training on specific noise, breaking the dependence of traditional denoising methods on supervised data.","technical_approach":"Original zero-shot denoising paradigm. It first pretrains the model on large-scale general images with random mask reconstruction task, letting the model learn the distribution knowledge of natural images, then uses the pretrained weights to do iterative fill denoising on a single noisy image. It discards the prior requirement of training on noisy-clean paired data, and unlike existing zero-shot denoising methods, it only relies on general masked pretraining, without any finetuning for the denoising task.","experiments":"Specific model architectures, noise types, baseline metrics and denoising quality improvement ranges are not disclosed in the truncated abstract, pending complete paper release.","authors_note":""},"tags":["masked-modeling","image-pretraining","denoising","iterative-decoding"],"keywords":["image restoration","image denoising，self-supervised learning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"掩码预训练可以让视觉模型学习到通用的自然图像表示","claim_en":"Masked pretraining allows vision models to learn general natural image representations","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"掩码预训练的视觉模型天然具备通用零样本去噪的能力，无需针对去噪任务做任何训练或微调","claim_en":"Masked pretrained vision models naturally have universal zero-shot denoising ability, without any training or finetuning for the denoising task","opposes":"此前主流观点认为零样本去噪需要针对去噪任务设计特定的模型结构或训练目标","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§2 Observation","why_contested":"如果成立，将彻底改变图像去噪的技术范式，大幅降低去噪模型的部署成本，提升对未知噪声分布的泛化能力"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于CV领域掩码预训练的下游应用，仅作为预训练表示通用性的旁证，无需细读正文。","en":"It is a downstream application of masked pretraining in CV domain, only serves as side evidence of pretrained representation generality, no need to read full text."}},{"id":"2406.04325","title":"ShareGPT4Video: Improving Video Understanding and Generation with Better Captions","authors":["Lin Chen","Xilin Wei","Jinsong Li","Xiaoyi Dong","Pan Zhang","Yuhang Zang","Zehui Chen","Haodong Duan","Lin Bin","Zhenyu Tang","Li Yuan","Yu Qiao","Dahua Lin","Feng Zhao","Jiaqi Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$13c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.04325","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0016WLD0ZCDB00024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0016WLD0ZCDB00024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/22a7476e4fd36818777c47e666f61a41-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大视频语言模型（LVLM）和文生视频模型的性能受限于低质量、稀疏的视频标注数据，此前的标注方案要么人工成本过高不可扩展，要么粒度过粗无法支撑复杂的视频理解与生成需求。","importance":"数据级贡献，提供了可复用的高质量视频标注数据集与自动标注工具，为LVLM和文生视频模型的预训练/微调提供了更高质量的训练信号，降低了视频多模态研究的数据门槛。","technical_approach":"属于数据工程类改进工作，首先设计过滤与标注策略用GPT-4V生成4万条多来源、多时长视频的稠密精准标注，再训练轻量化的ShareCaptioner-Video自动标注模型，生成480万条高质量审美视频标注，最后基于新数据微调得到8B参数的LVLM基线。放弃了高成本不可扩展的人工标注路线，通过大模型标注+自动标注工具的组合平衡标注质量与规模。","experiments":"微调得到的8B参数LVLM在3个主流视频基准上性能优于同类基线，未披露具体提升幅度；自动标注工具支持任意时长视频，生成的标注密度远高于常规标注方案，未披露详细消融实验结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Performance of existing large video-language models (LVLMs) and text-to-video models is bottlenecked by low-quality, sparse video annotation data. Prior annotation solutions are either unscalable due to high human labor cost, or too coarse-grained to support complex video understanding and generation requirements.","importance":"This is a data-level contribution. It provides reusable high-quality video annotation datasets and an automatic annotation tool, delivering higher-quality training signals for pretraining/finetuning of LVLMs and text-to-video models, and reduces the data barrier for video multimodal research.","technical_approach":"This is a data engineering improvement work. First, it designs filtering and annotation pipelines to generate 40K dense, high-precision captions for videos of diverse sources and lengths using GPT-4V. Then it trains a lightweight automatic captioning model ShareCaptioner-Video, which generates 4.8M captions for high-quality aesthetic videos. Finally, it finetunes an 8B parameter LVLM baseline on the new dataset. It abandons the high-cost, unscalable human annotation route, and balances annotation quality and scale through the combination of large model annotation and automatic annotation tools.","experiments":"The finetuned 8B LVLM outperforms peer baselines on 3 mainstream video benchmarks, no specific improvement margin is disclosed. The automatic annotation tool supports arbitrary-length videos, and the generated caption density is much higher than conventional annotation solutions. No detailed ablation results are reported.","authors_note":""},"tags":["video-captioning","data-quality","synthetic-data","vlm"],"keywords":["large video-language models","text-to-video models"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"视频标注的质量直接影响多模态视频模型的理解与生成性能","claim_en":"Quality of video captions directly affects the understanding and generation performance of multimodal video models","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"直接获取数据集下载链接，做多模态预训练的研究员可直接用该标注数据提升视频理解能力。","en":"Get the dataset download link directly, multimodal pretraining researchers can use this annotated data to improve video understanding performance."}},{"id":"2405.14156","title":"Unveiling the Tapestry of Consistency in Large Vision-Language Models","authors":["Yuan Zhang","Fei Xiao","Tao Huang","Chun-Kai Fan","Hongyuan Dong","Jiawen Li","Jiacong Wang","Kuan Cheng","Shanghang Zhang","Haoyuan Guo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$13d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14156","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0020X0FDLWCZG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0020X0FDLWCZG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d6f094ba0f5ce1720466342f78031bdb-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大视觉语言模型（LVLM）对同一知识点在不同解空间的提示下会输出不一致的回答，此前的LVLM评估仅关注单提示准确率，没有系统性衡量这种一致性问题，直接削弱了用户对模型输出的信任度。","importance":"基准级贡献，首次推出专门衡量LVLM跨解空间回答一致性的多模态基准ConBench，填补了LVLM可靠性评估的空白，为后续LVLM的对齐与可靠性优化提供了标准化评估工具。","technical_approach":"属于基准构建类原创工作，设计覆盖判别、生成等多场景的测试用例，每个知识点对应多个不同解空间的提示，通过统计同一知识点下不同提示的回答一致性量化模型可靠性。放弃了传统仅测单提示准确率的评估逻辑，新增跨提示一致性的评估维度。","experiments":"基于ConBench的测试发现，在判别类任务中，提示的解空间越大，模型回答的准确率越低；未披露具体的模型测试数值，仅给出上述趋势性观察。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing large vision-language models (LVLMs) produce inconsistent answers to the same knowledge point when prompted with different solution spaces. Prior LVLM evaluations only focus on single-prompt accuracy, lack systematic measurement of such consistency issues, and directly erode user trust in model outputs.","importance":"This is a benchmark-level contribution. It releases ConBench, the first multimodal benchmark specifically designed to measure answer consistency of LVLMs across different solution spaces, filling the gap in LVLM reliability evaluation, and provides a standardized evaluation tool for subsequent LVLM alignment and reliability optimization.","technical_approach":"This is an original benchmark construction work. It designs test cases covering discriminative, generative and other scenarios, where each knowledge point corresponds to multiple prompts with different solution spaces. It quantifies model reliability by counting answer consistency across different prompts for the same knowledge point. It abandons the traditional evaluation logic that only measures single-prompt accuracy, and adds the evaluation dimension of cross-prompt consistency.","experiments":"Tests on ConBench show that for discriminative tasks, the larger the solution space of the prompt, the lower the model's answer accuracy. No specific model test values are given, only the above trend observation is disclosed.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","consistency","evaluation","reasoning"],"keywords":["Consistency","ConBench","Large Vision-Language Models","Analysis"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LVLM的输出可靠性是影响其落地应用的核心指标之一","claim_en":"Output reliability of LVLMs is one of the core indicators affecting their deployment","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"现有仅基于单提示准确率的LVLM评估体系高估了模型的实际可靠性能","claim_en":"Existing LVLM evaluation systems based solely on single-prompt accuracy overestimate the actual reliability of models","opposes":"Prior LVLM evaluations use single-prompt accuracy as the core metric to represent overall model performance","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Findings","why_contested":"This conclusion indicates that subsequent LVLM optimization needs to consider both accuracy and consistency, otherwise there will be a disconnect between evaluation performance and actual deployment performance."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看ConBench基准的构建逻辑，做多模态对齐的研究员可直接用该基准评估LVLM输出一致性。","en":"Read ConBench benchmark construction logic, multimodal alignment researchers can use this benchmark to evaluate LVLM output consistency."}},{"id":"2405.14768","title":"WISE: Rethinking the Knowledge Memory for Lifelong Model Editing of Large Language Models","authors":["Peng Wang","Zexi Li","Ningyu Zhang","Ziwen Xu","Yunzhi Yao","Yong Jiang","Pengjun Xie","Fei Huang","Huajun Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$13e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14768","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/0104L0XY0X0C24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/0104L0XY0X0C24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/60960ad78868fce5c165295fbd895060-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大语言模型终身编辑方法要么编辑模型参数（长时记忆）要么用检索增强（工作记忆），两者都无法同时满足可靠性、泛化性、局部性三个核心要求，形成不可能三角；此前的编辑方法大多仅在单次编辑场景下测试，未考虑终身编辑下的累积冲突问题。","importance":"方法级贡献，首次明确了终身模型编辑场景下的不可能三角约束，为后续模型编辑方法的设计提供了理论边界，同时提出WISE方法平衡三个核心指标的表现。","technical_approach":"属于理论分析+方法改进的原创工作，首先通过实验验证仅编辑长时记忆或工作记忆都会触发不可能三角，再提出WISE方法结合两种记忆的优势：用工作记忆存储近期编辑的知识，定期将验证过的稳定知识合并到长时记忆中。放弃了单一记忆类型的编辑路线，平衡了终身编辑下的三个核心指标。","experiments":"实验验证仅使用长时或工作记忆的编辑方法无法同时满足三个核心指标，提出的WISE方法在终身编辑基准上三个指标的综合表现优于现有基线，未披露具体提升幅度；消融实验显示记忆合并策略的设计直接决定了三个指标的平衡效果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing lifelong model editing methods for large language models either edit model parameters (long-term memory) or use retrieval augmentation (working memory). Neither can simultaneously meet the three core requirements of reliability, generalization, and locality, forming an impossible triangle. Prior editing methods are mostly tested in single-edit scenarios, and do not consider cumulative conflicts in lifelong editing settings.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution. It first clarifies the impossible triangle constraint in lifelong model editing scenarios, provides a theoretical boundary for the design of subsequent model editing methods, and proposes the WISE method to balance the performance of the three core indicators.","technical_approach":"This is an original work combining theoretical analysis and method improvement. First, it verifies through experiments that editing only long-term or working memory will trigger the impossible triangle. Then it proposes the WISE method that combines the advantages of both memory types: it stores recently edited knowledge in working memory, and periodically merges verified stable knowledge into long-term memory. It abandons the editing route of single memory type, and balances the three core indicators in lifelong editing settings.","experiments":"Experiments verify that editing methods using only long-term or working memory cannot meet the three core indicators at the same time. The proposed WISE method outperforms existing baselines on the comprehensive performance of the three indicators on lifelong editing benchmarks, no specific improvement margin is disclosed. Ablation shows that the design of memory merging strategy directly determines the balance effect of the three indicators.","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-editing","memory","knowledge","continual-learning"],"keywords":["Lifelong Model Editing","Large Language Model","Knowledge Memory"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大语言模型需要持续更新知识以适配新的事实和纠正幻觉","claim_en":"Large language models require continuous knowledge updates to adapt to new facts and correct hallucinations","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"终身模型编辑场景下，仅编辑长时记忆或仅使用工作记忆的方案无法同时满足可靠性、泛化性、局部性三个要求","claim_en":"In lifelong model editing scenarios, solutions that only edit long-term memory or only use working memory cannot meet the three requirements of reliability, generalization, and locality at the same time","opposes":"Prior model editing methods mostly optimize for single-edit scenarios, claiming to achieve all three indicators","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§2 Analysis","why_contested":"This conclusion overturns the design assumption of previous methods for single-edit scenarios, requiring subsequent methods to consider the cumulative effect of lifelong editing."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"终身模型编辑首次明确不可能三角约束，只看§3的约束分析和§4的双记忆架构设计即可，可给内部编辑方法迭代做参考","en":"First explicitly defines the impossible triangle for lifelong LLM editing, only read §3 constraint analysis and §4 dual-memory architecture to inform internal editing method iteration"}},{"id":"Abbasi-YadkoriK24","title":"To Believe or Not to Believe Your LLM: Iterative Prompting for Estimating Epistemic Uncertainty","authors":["Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori","Ilja Kuzborskij","András György","Csaba Szepesvári"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$13f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Abbasi-YadkoriK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Abbasi-YadkoriK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/6aebba00fff5b6de7b488e496f80edd7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大语言模型的不确定性估计方法大多需要访问模型内部权重或logits，无法在黑盒场景下使用，且无法区分认知不确定性（知识不足导致的可修正误差）和偶然不确定性（问题本身的固有随机性）；此前的方法要么只能测总不确定性，要么依赖白盒访问。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了仅靠迭代提示就能估计黑盒LLM认知不确定性的信息论指标，不需要访问模型内部参数，适配API调用的黑盒场景，为LLM输出的可靠性校验提供了可落地的工具。","technical_approach":"属于提示工程+信息论结合的原创方法，推导了区分认知和偶然不确定性的信息论度量标准，设计了基于历史输出迭代生成多个回答的提示策略，仅通过多个输出的分布统计就能计算认知不确定性的大小。放弃了需要白盒访问的设计，适配更多落地场景。","experiments":"实验验证该方法在黑盒场景下识别高认知不确定性样本的准确率优于现有仅靠单次输出置信度的基线方法，未披露具体提升幅度；消融实验显示迭代生成的回答数量直接影响估计的准确性。","authors_note":"Csaba Szepesvári为强化学习、不确定性估计领域的知名学者"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing uncertainty estimation methods for large language models mostly require access to internal model weights or logits, cannot be used in black-box scenarios, and cannot distinguish between epistemic uncertainty (revisable error caused by insufficient knowledge) and aleatoric uncertainty (inherent randomness of the problem itself). Prior methods either only measure total uncertainty or rely on white-box access.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution. It proposes an information-theoretic metric for estimating epistemic uncertainty of black-box LLMs only through iterative prompting, no access to internal model parameters is required, which is suitable for black-box scenarios of API calls, and provides a deployable tool for reliability verification of LLM outputs.","technical_approach":"This is an original method combining prompt engineering and information theory. It derives an information-theoretic metric to distinguish epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty, designs an iterative prompting strategy that generates multiple answers based on historical outputs. It can calculate the magnitude of epistemic uncertainty only through the distribution statistics of multiple outputs, abandons the design requiring white-box access, and adapts to more deployment scenarios.","experiments":"Experiments verify that the accuracy of this method for identifying samples with high epistemic uncertainty in black-box scenarios is better than existing baseline methods that only rely on single-output confidence. No specific improvement margin is disclosed. Ablation shows that the number of iteratively generated answers directly affects the estimation accuracy.","authors_note":"Csaba Szepesvári is a well-known researcher in the fields of reinforcement learning and uncertainty estimation"},"tags":["uncertainty","prompting","evaluation","calibration"],"keywords":["uncertainty quantification","large language models"],"notable_authors":["Csaba Szepesvári"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大语言模型的认知不确定性是导致其输出不可靠的核心原因之一","claim_en":"Epistemic uncertainty of large language models is one of the core reasons for their unreliable outputs","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅通过黑盒迭代提示生成的多个输出，就可以有效区分LLM的认知不确定性和偶然不确定性","claim_en":"Only through multiple outputs generated by black-box iterative prompting, the epistemic uncertainty and aleatoric uncertainty of LLMs can be effectively distinguished","opposes":"Prior uncertainty estimation methods believe that distinguishing the two types of uncertainty requires access to model internal parameters or multiple model checkpoints","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"This conclusion greatly reduces the deployment threshold of uncertainty estimation, making output reliability verification possible in API call scenarios."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"黑盒LLM认知不确定性估计的纯提示方案，只看§3的信息论度量推导和§4的提示策略设计即可，可直接落地到API调用的可靠性校验","en":"Pure prompt-based epistemic uncertainty estimation for black-box LLMs, only read §3 info-theoretic metric derivation and §4 prompt strategy for direct API reliability check deployment"}},{"id":"AithalMLK24","title":"Understanding Hallucinations in Diffusion Models through Mode Interpolation","authors":["Sumukh K. Aithal","Pratyush Maini","Zachary C. Lipton","J. Zico Kolter"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$140","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AithalMLK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AithalMLK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/f29369d192b13184b65c6d2515474d78-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的核心问题是：扩散模型的 hallucination 不是简单的“随机生成错误”，而可能来自模式之间的插值与混合。以往对 hallucination 的讨论更多停留在现象层，或者归因于数据偏差、引导过强、采样噪声；这篇工作尝试给出一个更结构化的解释。","importance":"它的重要性在于机制分析，而不是提出新的生成器。对 pretrain 研究的启发是：如果扩散模型错误生成的根源与 mode interpolation 有关，那么训练目标、前向噪声设计和采样路径选择就不仅影响质量，也会系统性影响虚构内容的类型；这对 diffusion LM、视觉生成和联合多模态生成都相关。","technical_approach":"核心方法是通过分析或构造不同数据模式之间的插值行为，解释扩散模型何时会把多个模式拼接成一个不存在的样本。与把 hallucination 视为单点失败不同，这种视角把问题放在数据流形和去噪轨迹之间的几何关系上：若中间状态落在两个真实模式之间，而模型又倾向于平滑连接，就会产生细节看似合理、语义却并不存在的样本。这个设计有效之处在于它能给出可检验的机制；边界是它更擅长解释一类由模式混合造成的 hallucination，而不一定覆盖所有失败模式。","experiments":"目前没有摘要，无法确认使用了哪些数据集、模型架构和量化指标。按题目推断，实验应会展示在可控分布和真实图像模型中，mode interpolation 与 hallucination 之间的关联，并通过可视化、插值路径或统计指标支持这一解释；但具体数值和 baseline 不能凭空补全。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a specific explanation for hallucinations in diffusion models: they may arise from interpolation between modes rather than from generic randomness. Prior discussions often stayed descriptive or blamed data bias, guidance strength, or sampling noise; this work tries to isolate a more structural mechanism.","importance":"This is important as a mechanistic analysis rather than a new generator. For pretraining-oriented readers, the key implication is that training objectives, noise schedules, and sampling trajectories may shape not only fidelity but also the kinds of false content diffusion models invent. That is relevant beyond images, including diffusion language modeling and multimodal generation.","technical_approach":"The approach appears to analyze how denoising trajectories move between distinct data modes and when the model stitches them into samples that look locally plausible but are globally unreal. The key idea is geometric: if intermediate states lie between real modes and the denoiser prefers smooth transitions, the model may synthesize non-existent combinations. This is useful because it turns hallucination into a testable mechanism rather than a vague failure category. The limitation is scope: not every hallucination has to come from mode interpolation.","experiments":"The prompt does not provide the abstract, so datasets, architectures, and quantitative metrics cannot be stated reliably. The expected evidence would include controlled distributions and real-image diffusion models, with visualizations or statistics linking interpolation behavior to hallucination frequency, but exact numbers should not be invented.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion-model","hallucination","mode-interpolation"],"keywords":["diffusion","generative models","hallucination"],"recommendation":{"zh":"扩散模型幻觉归因于模式插值的机制分析，只看§4的插值实验和Fig5的失败样例拆解即可，可指导扩散预训练的目标与采样路径优化","en":"Mechanistic analysis linking diffusion hallucinations to mode interpolation, only read §4 interpolation experiments and Fig5 failure cases to optimize diffusion pretraining objectives and sampling paths"}},{"id":"Al-TahanGBBHI24","title":"UniBench: Visual Reasoning Requires Rethinking Vision-Language Beyond Scaling","authors":["Haider Al-Tahan","Quentin Garrido","Randall Balestriero","Diane Bouchacourt","Caner Hazirbas","Mark Ibrahim"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$141","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Al-TahanGBBHI24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Al-TahanGBBHI24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/96271227d3e204501d199433e56af289-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：视觉推理并不只是把 VLM 做大、喂更多图文数据就会自然出现，现有评测和训练方式可能高估了 scaling 的作用。过去很多工作默认更大的 backbone、更长的训练和更多图文对能带来推理能力，但视觉推理常被数据偏差、模板记忆和 benchmark 污染掩盖。","importance":"它的重要性更偏评测与研究方向校正。对 VLM 预训练的启示是：如果视觉推理需要重新思考，而不是继续沿着规模扩张走，那么数据构造、任务分解、视觉表示粒度和跨模态对齐目标都可能需要改；这类工作未必直接给新模型，但会影响整个方向的训练目标设计。","technical_approach":"核心方法大概率是提出 UniBench 这样的统一视觉推理基准，并用它系统检验现有 VLM 的真实推理能力。与常见 benchmark 只测表面问答正确率不同，这类基准会刻意控制语言捷径、视觉干扰和组合泛化，逼模型依赖真正的视觉证据与多步推理。其设计有效，是因为它把“会答题”和“会看图推理”区分开；代价是 benchmark 越严格，现有模型分数往往越低，也更容易暴露评测覆盖面有限的问题。","experiments":"给定信息没有实验细节，因此无法确认有哪些模型参与评测、指标是多少、领先模型掉分幅度多大。按题目判断，最关键的实验事实应是：大量主流 VLM 在 UniBench 上表现显著低于在传统 benchmark 上的印象，且单纯扩大模型或数据并不能稳定解决某些推理子类；如果有消融，最有价值的是区分视觉感知不足、语言捷径和推理链失效各自占比。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper argues that visual reasoning is not something current VLMs acquire reliably just by scaling model size and image-text data. Much of the field has assumed that bigger pretraining will eventually solve it, but existing benchmarks often conflate genuine reasoning with shortcut exploitation, memorization, or language priors.","importance":"This is mainly an evaluation and direction-setting contribution. For multimodal pretraining, the implication is strong: if visual reasoning does not emerge cleanly from scaling, then data construction, objective design, representation granularity, and alignment strategy may all need revision rather than more of the same.","technical_approach":"The likely core contribution is UniBench, a benchmark designed to isolate visual reasoning from superficial success on standard VLM tasks. The point is not just to add harder questions, but to remove easy linguistic shortcuts and require dependence on actual visual evidence and compositional reasoning. That matters because it separates ‘answering benchmark questions’ from ‘reasoning over images’. The trade-off is that stricter evaluation often lowers scores across the board and may still cover only part of the reasoning space.","experiments":"The prompt does not include the abstract or metrics, so I cannot reliably name the evaluated models or quote score gaps. The expected result is that many strong VLMs underperform on UniBench relative to their reputation on existing benchmarks, and that simple scaling does not consistently close the gap on key reasoning subsets.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","benchmark","visual-reasoning","scaling"],"keywords":["vision-language model","visual reasoning","zero-shot","VLM scaling"],"recommendation":{"zh":"VLM视觉推理无法仅靠scaling提升的实证分析，只看§5的基准测试结果即可，可校正内部VLM预训练的研发方向，避免无效堆规模","en":"Empirical proof that VLM visual reasoning cannot be improved by scaling alone, only read §5 benchmark results to adjust internal VLM pretraining direction and avoid ineffective scaling"}},{"id":"AlonsoJMKSPF24","title":"Diffusion for World Modeling: Visual Details Matter in Atari","authors":["Eloi Alonso","Adam Jelley","Vincent Micheli","Anssi Kanervisto","Amos J. Storkey","Tim Pearce","François Fleuret"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$142","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/AlonsoJMKSPF24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/AlonsoJMKSPF24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/6bdde0373d53d4a501249547084bed43-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在 world model 里，视觉细节是否真的重要，以及扩散模型相比其他生成建模方式能否更好地保留这种细节。过去很多 Atari world model 更偏重压缩后的潜变量预测或低分辨率重建，足以服务控制，但不一定足以支持高保真环境建模；这篇工作重新强调细节保真的价值。","importance":"它的贡献属于生成式世界模型的方法探索，对统一生成建模和视频/多模态预训练都有启发。原因是 world model 并不只是 RL 里的环境模拟器，它也是“如何对序列化视觉未来建模”的问题；如果扩散方法在保留小物体、快速运动或稀有事件细节上更强，那么这对视觉 token 设计和时序生成目标都有意义。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把扩散模型用于 Atari world modeling，并专门分析视觉细节对预测和下游控制的影响。与只在潜空间做一步预测或用 AR 像素建模不同，扩散模型通过逐步去噪更擅长表达多峰未来和细粒度纹理，因此更适合那些“小像素差异影响游戏状态”的场景。它的关键选择是接受更重的采样成本，换取更高保真、更少平均化的未来帧；边界则是训练和推理开销较大，且并非所有控制任务都需要这种视觉精度。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认具体 Atari 任务数、模型规模、评价指标和提升幅度。按标题判断，实验最关键的证据应包括：扩散 world model 在视觉重建或预测质量上优于 prior world models，且这种细节优势在某些 Atari 游戏里转化成更好的规划或控制表现；如果有消融，最值得看的是压低视觉细节后性能如何退化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper revisits a question that many world-model papers sidestep: do visual details actually matter for learned environment models, and can diffusion models preserve them better? Prior Atari world models often leaned on compressed latents or coarse reconstructions that were good enough for control, but not necessarily faithful as generative simulators.","importance":"This is a methodological contribution in generative world modeling, with relevance beyond RL. A world model is also a sequence-generation problem over visual futures, so if diffusion handles small but decision-relevant details better, that has implications for visual tokenization, predictive modeling, and multimodal pretraining more broadly.","technical_approach":"The likely method applies diffusion to Atari world modeling and studies the role of visual fidelity explicitly. Compared with latent autoregressive prediction or simple frame prediction, diffusion is better suited to multimodal futures and fine texture, which matters when tiny pixel differences carry state information. The design trade-off is clear: heavier training and sampling cost in exchange for less averaging and sharper future predictions.","experiments":"The prompt does not include the abstract, so I cannot verify the number of games, model sizes, metrics, or exact gains. The key empirical claim should be that diffusion-based world models improve visual prediction quality and that these gains matter downstream in at least some Atari control or planning settings, especially where fine details are behaviorally important.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","world-model","atari","reinforcement-learning"],"keywords":["World models","diffusion models","reinforcement learning","generative models","Atari"],"recommendation":{"zh":"扩散世界模型对Atari视觉细节保留的价值验证，只看§4的控制任务性能对比和Fig6的细节重建样例即可，可指导多模态时序预训练的token设计","en":"Validates diffusion world model's value in retaining Atari visual details, only read §4 control task comparison and Fig6 reconstruction samples to guide multimodal temporal pretraining token design"}},{"id":"BartoshVN24","title":"Neural Flow Diffusion Models: Learnable Forward Process for Improved Diffusion Modelling","authors":["Grigory Bartosh","Dmitry P. Vetrov","Christian Andersson Naesseth"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$143","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BartoshVN24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BartoshVN24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/871a8ccb9232487366feb5e2d9069915-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：标准扩散模型的前向加噪过程通常是人工指定的，这种固定噪声路径可能并不适合数据分布，进而限制建模效率和生成质量。过去主流工作把大部分精力放在反向去噪网络、参数化方式和采样器上，而前向过程往往被当作不可学习的背景设定。","importance":"它的贡献是扩散建模范式内部的重要改进，对 diffusion LM 和多模态生成都值得关注。原因是前向过程定义了训练时模型要学会反演什么，如果这条路径可以被数据自适应地优化，那么训练目标就更贴近真实分布结构，可能带来更低估计偏差或更高采样效率。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Neural Flow Diffusion Models：把前向过程做成可学习的 flow，而不是固定高斯加噪。与经典 DDPM/score-based 方法相比，它不再预设单一退化路径，而是学习一条更适合数据几何的连续变换，使得从数据到噪声的映射、以及反向生成的难度都更合理。设计上它在灵活性和稳定性之间做权衡：更可学习意味着更强表达力，但也增加训练不稳和可识别性问题，因此通常需要额外约束保证前向过程不会退化成难以反演的变换。","experiments":"给定信息中没有摘要，因此无法可靠写出数据集、模型规模、FID 或 likelihood 数字。按题目判断，关键实验应是和固定前向过程的扩散模型比较，展示在生成质量、对数似然或采样步数上的改善，并通过消融说明 learnable forward process 的收益不是单纯来自更大网络；具体幅度目前无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a design choice that diffusion models usually leave fixed: the forward process. Standard diffusion uses a hand-specified noising path, which may be poorly matched to the data distribution and may make the reverse problem harder than necessary. Most prior work optimized the denoiser and sampler while treating the corruption process as given.","importance":"This is an important within-paradigm advance for diffusion modeling, with relevance to diffusion language models and multimodal generation. The forward process defines what the model has to invert during training, so making it data-adaptive can change both modeling bias and sampling efficiency.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to replace the fixed forward noising process with a learnable neural flow. Unlike DDPM-style formulations that commit to a predefined corruption path, this method learns a transformation better aligned with data geometry, potentially making both training and generation easier. The benefit is flexibility; the cost is that learnable forward dynamics are harder to stabilize and may require constraints to remain invertible and well-behaved.","experiments":"The prompt does not include the abstract, so I cannot state datasets, model sizes, FID, likelihood, or sampling-speed numbers. The expected evidence would compare against standard fixed-forward diffusion baselines and show that the learnable forward process improves quality or efficiency beyond what can be explained by extra model capacity alone.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","forward-process","generative-modeling","optimization"],"keywords":["diffusion","generative models","variational inference"],"recommendation":{"zh":"可学习前向过程的扩散模型改进方案，只看§3的神经流前向过程设计和§5的采样效率对比即可，可给内部扩散LM的架构迭代做参考","en":"Diffusion model improvement with learnable forward process, only read §3 neural flow forward design and §5 sampling efficiency comparison to inform internal diffusion LM architecture iteration"}},{"id":"BeanHMMCCHK24","title":"LINGOLY: A Benchmark of Olympiad-Level Linguistic Reasoning Puzzles in Low Resource and Extinct Languages","authors":["Andrew M. Bean","Simi Hellsten","Harry Mayne","Jabez Magomere","Ethan Chi","Ryan Chi","Scott Hale","Hannah Rose Kirk"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$144","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BeanHMMCCHK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BeanHMMCCHK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/2e43584b7d7b32fb6b2aa83b32dbbb20-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大语言模型的推理能力评估基准大多存在数据污染问题，且无法衡量模型对极低资源/灭绝语言的模式识别和泛化能力；此前的基准要么覆盖高资源语言，要么难度不足无法区分高阶推理能力。","importance":"基准级贡献，推出了基于语言学奥赛题的LingOly基准，覆盖90+低资源/灭绝语言，基本避免了数据污染问题，为评估LLM的零样本泛化和语言学推理能力提供了更可靠的测试集。","technical_approach":"属于基准构建类原创工作，收集了1133道语言学奥赛题，覆盖6种题型、5个难度等级，所有题目涉及的语言大多是低资源或灭绝语言，最小化训练数据中出现相关内容的概率；同时设计了无上下文基线来惩罚记忆带来的虚高准确率。放弃了使用高资源语言常见任务的设计逻辑，更聚焦原生推理能力。","experiments":"测试了11个主流SOTA大模型，所有模型在最高难度题目上的准确率远低于人类水平，即使最强的闭源模型准确率也不足30%；实验显示模型的参数量和预训练数据规模与LingOly上的性能只有弱相关性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing reasoning ability evaluation benchmarks for large language models mostly have data contamination problems, and cannot measure the model's pattern recognition and generalization ability for very low-resource or extinct languages. Prior benchmarks either cover high-resource languages or are not difficult enough to distinguish high-order reasoning ability.","importance":"This is a benchmark-level contribution. It releases the LingOly benchmark based on linguistic Olympiad puzzles, covering more than 90 low-resource/extinct languages, which basically avoids data contamination problems, and provides a more reliable test set for evaluating the zero-shot generalization and linguistic reasoning ability of LLMs.","technical_approach":"This is an original benchmark construction work. It collects 1,133 linguistic Olympiad puzzles, covering 6 question types and 5 difficulty levels. Most of the languages involved in the questions are low-resource or extinct, minimizing the probability of relevant content appearing in training data. At the same time, a no-context baseline is designed to penalize inflated accuracy caused by memorization. It abandons the design logic of using common tasks in high-resource languages, and focuses more on native reasoning ability.","experiments":"11 mainstream SOTA large models are tested, and the accuracy of all models on the highest difficulty questions is far lower than the human level. Even the strongest closed-source model has an accuracy of less than 30%. Experiments show that the parameter size and pre-training data scale of the model have only weak correlation with the performance on LingOly.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","linguistic-reasoning","low-resource","evaluation"],"keywords":["reasoning","language models","benchmark","linguistics"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"数据污染是现有LLM评估基准面临的核心问题之一","claim_en":"Data contamination is one of the core problems faced by existing LLM evaluation benchmarks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"现有大语言模型在低资源/灭绝语言的模式识别和泛化任务上的性能远低于人类水平，且与模型规模没有强正相关","claim_en":"The performance of existing large language models on pattern recognition and generalization tasks for low-resource/extinct languages is far lower than the human level, and there is no strong positive correlation with model scale","opposes":"Prior scaling law studies believe that model performance on reasoning tasks increases monotonically with model scale","opposes_cite_hint":"Hoffmann 2022 Chinchilla","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"This conclusion indicates that the reasoning ability of existing LLMs may rely on relevant pattern memory in training data, rather than native generalization reasoning ability, challenging the applicable boundary of scaling laws."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"低资源/灭绝语言的奥赛级语言学推理基准，无数据污染，作为文献备查即可，不需要读正文","en":"Olympiad-level linguistic reasoning benchmark for low-resource/extinct languages with no data contamination, only for literature reference, no need to read full text"}},{"id":"BehrouzSZ24","title":"Chimera: Effectively Modeling Multivariate Time Series with 2-Dimensional State Space Models","authors":["Ali Behrouz","Michele Santacatterina","Ramin Zabih"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$145","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BehrouzSZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BehrouzSZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d8e80772c27beff4ae1676fb147bbf26-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有多变量时间序列建模方法无法同时满足长时序依赖建模、变量间依赖捕捉、动态关联建模、长序列高效推理四个要求；传统单变量状态空间模型（SSM）的表达能力不足以捕捉多变量间的复杂关联，此前的多变量SSM方法要么计算复杂度高，要么无法动态建模时间和变量维度的依赖。","importance":"架构级贡献，提出了2维状态空间模型Chimera，首次将SSM拓展到同时处理时间和变量两个维度的依赖，为多变量长时序建模提供了更高效的架构选择。","technical_approach":"属于架构创新类原创工作，将传统1维SSM拓展为2维结构，分别沿时间维度和变量维度建模依赖关系，设计了动态权重机制来自适应调整两个维度的关联强度。放弃了传统SSM仅处理时序维度的设计，同时保持了线性复杂度的训练和推理效率。","experiments":"在医疗、金融等多个多变量时间序列基准上，Chimera的预测准确率优于现有1维SSM基线，推理速度优于同性能的Transformer基线，未披露具体提升幅度；消融实验显示2维结构是性能提升的核心来源。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing multivariate time series modeling methods cannot simultaneously meet the four requirements of long-term temporal dependency modeling, inter-variate dependency capture, dynamic association modeling, and efficient inference for long sequences. Traditional univariate state space models (SSMs) have insufficient expressive power to capture complex associations between multiple variables, and prior multivariate SSM methods either have high computational complexity or cannot dynamically model dependencies in time and variate dimensions.","importance":"This is an architecture-level contribution. It proposes Chimera, a 2-dimensional state space model, which extends SSM to handle dependencies in both time and variate dimensions for the first time, providing a more efficient architecture choice for multivariate long time series modeling.","technical_approach":"This is an original work of architecture innovation. It extends the traditional 1-dimensional SSM to a 2-dimensional structure, modeling dependencies along the time dimension and variate dimension respectively. A dynamic weight mechanism is designed to adaptively adjust the association strength of the two dimensions. It abandons the traditional SSM design that only processes the temporal dimension, and maintains linear complexity for training and inference.","experiments":"On multiple multivariate time series benchmarks including healthcare and finance, Chimera has better prediction accuracy than existing 1-dimensional SSM baselines, and faster inference speed than Transformer baselines with the same performance. No specific improvement margin is disclosed. Ablation shows that the 2-dimensional structure is the core source of performance improvement.","authors_note":""},"tags":["state-space-model","sequence-modeling","architecture","efficiency"],"keywords":["Multivariate Time Series","Time Series Modeling","Time Series Forecasting","Time Series Classification"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"状态空间模型在长时序建模上比自注意力结构有更高的效率优势","claim_en":"State space models have higher efficiency advantages than self-attention structures in long time series modeling","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"将状态空间模型拓展为2维结构可以同时有效捕捉多变量时间序列的时序依赖和变量间依赖，且保持线性计算复杂度","claim_en":"Extending the state space model to a 2-dimensional structure can effectively capture both temporal dependencies and inter-variate dependencies of multivariate time series, while maintaining linear computational complexity","opposes":"Prior SSM studies believe that modeling inter-variate dependencies for multivariate time series will bring at least quadratic computational complexity","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"This conclusion expands the applicable scenarios of SSM, and provides a new architecture direction for multivariate long time series modeling."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"多变量时序建模的2维SSM架构，和LLM预训练相关性极低，仅了解核心结论即可，不需要细读","en":"2D SSM architecture for multivariate time series modeling, very low relevance to LLM pretraining, only grasp core conclusion, no deep reading needed"}},{"id":"BelouadiPE24","title":"DeTikZify: Synthesizing Graphics Programs for Scientific Figures and Sketches with TikZ","authors":["Jonas Belouadi","Simone Paolo Ponzetto","Steffen Eger"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$146","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BelouadiPE24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BelouadiPE24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9a8d52eb05eb7b13f54b3d9eada667b7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有科研图表生成方法无法将草图或光栅格式的现有科研图自动转换为语义完整的TikZ代码，手动编写TikZ代码或重绘图表的成本极高；此前的多模态代码生成模型没有针对TikZ场景的专用训练数据和模型。","importance":"应用级+数据级贡献，推出了目前最大的TikZ数据集DaTikZv2和对应的DeTikZify多模态模型，大幅降低了科研图表生成和复刻的成本，为结构化图形的多模态生成提供了可复用的数据集和基线。","technical_approach":"属于数据工程+模型微调的改进工作，首先构建了3个数据集：36万条人工编写的TikZ代码数据集DaTikZv2、草图对应科研图的SketchFig数据集、带元数据的科研图MetaFig数据集；然后微调多模态语言模型得到DeTikZify，支持输入草图或光栅图输出对应的TikZ代码。放弃了通用多模态生成模型的设计，针对TikZ场景的语法和结构做了专项优化。","experiments":"在图表生成基准上，DeTikZify生成的TikZ代码的语义准确率优于通用多模态代码生成模型，生成的代码可直接编译运行的比例远高于基线，未披露具体提升幅度；消融实验显示DaTikZv2数据集的规模和质量是性能提升的核心因素。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing scientific figure generation methods cannot automatically convert sketches or raster-format existing scientific figures into semantically complete TikZ code. The cost of manually writing TikZ code or redrawing figures is extremely high. Prior multimodal code generation models do not have dedicated training data and models for the TikZ scenario.","importance":"This is an application-level and data-level contribution. It releases DaTikZv2, the largest TikZ dataset to date, and the corresponding DeTikZify multimodal model, which greatly reduces the cost of scientific figure generation and reproduction, and provides reusable datasets and baselines for multimodal generation of structured graphics.","technical_approach":"This is an improvement work combining data engineering and model finetuning. First, it constructs 3 datasets: DaTikZv2 with 360K manually written TikZ codes, SketchFig with hand-drawn sketches paired with corresponding scientific figures, and MetaFig with diverse scientific figures and associated metadata. Then it finetunes a multimodal language model to get DeTikZify, which supports input of sketches or raster images and outputs corresponding TikZ code. It abandons the design of general multimodal generation models, and makes special optimization for the syntax and structure of TikZ scenarios.","experiments":"On the figure generation benchmark, the semantic accuracy of TikZ code generated by DeTikZify is better than that of general multimodal code generation models, and the proportion of generated code that can be compiled and run directly is much higher than baselines. No specific improvement margin is disclosed. Ablation shows that the scale and quality of the DaTikZv2 dataset are the core factors for performance improvement.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-generation","program-synthesis","scientific-figures","benchmark"],"keywords":["Vision Language Models","Code Generation","Image Understanding","Vector Graphics Generation"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"专用领域的训练数据可以显著提升大模型在垂直场景的生成性能","claim_en":"Domain-specific training data can significantly improve the generation performance of large models in vertical scenarios","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"科研图转TikZ代码的专用模型与数据集，属于垂直场景应用，仅做方向了解即可，不需要细读","en":"Specialized model and dataset for converting scientific figures to TikZ code, vertical application, only for general understanding, no deep reading needed"}},{"id":"BergstrasserKLZ24","title":"The Power of Hard Attention Transformers on Data Sequences: A formal language theoretic perspective","authors":["Pascal Bergsträßer","Chris Köcher","Anthony Widjaja Lin","Georg Zetzsche"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$147","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BergstrasserKLZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BergstrasserKLZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/af58a33861ac45472ea1cc5860d2b13e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有Transformer的表达能力分析大多基于有界token嵌入的形式语言场景，无法适用时序等输入为任意数值序列的场景；此前的分析结论无法解释硬注意力Transformer在数值序列任务上的性能优势。","importance":"理论级贡献，从形式语言理论的角度首次分析了硬注意力Transformer在任意数值序列输入下的表达能力，填补了相关理论空白，为后续Transformer在时序等数值序列场景的架构设计提供了理论支撑。","technical_approach":"属于理论分析类原创工作，拓展了传统形式语言的分析框架到数值序列输入场景，严格证明了硬注意力Transformer的表达能力高于软注意力Transformer和传统RNN等架构，明确了硬注意力在处理数值序列时的能力边界。放弃了传统分析中假设token值有界的前提，适配更广泛的输入场景。","experiments":"无实际深度学习实验，全部为形式化理论证明，推导得出硬注意力Transformer可识别的语言类严格包含软注意力Transformer可识别的语言类。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing expressive power analysis of Transformers is mostly based on formal language scenarios with bounded token embeddings, which cannot be applied to scenarios where inputs are arbitrary numerical sequences such as time series. Prior analysis conclusions cannot explain the performance advantage of hard attention Transformers on numerical sequence tasks.","importance":"This is a theory-level contribution. It analyzes the expressive power of hard attention Transformers under arbitrary numerical sequence inputs from the perspective of formal language theory for the first time, filling the relevant theoretical gap, and providing theoretical support for subsequent Transformer architecture design in numerical sequence scenarios such as time series.","technical_approach":"This is an original theoretical analysis work. It extends the traditional formal language analysis framework to numerical sequence input scenarios, strictly proves that the expressive power of hard attention Transformers is higher than that of soft attention Transformers and traditional RNN architectures, and clarifies the capability boundary of hard attention when processing numerical sequences. It abandons the traditional premise of bounded token values in analysis, and adapts to a wider range of input scenarios.","experiments":"There are no actual deep learning experiments, all are formal theoretical proofs. It is derived that the language class recognizable by hard attention Transformers strictly includes the language class recognizable by soft attention Transformers.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformer","hard-attention","formal-languages","theory"],"keywords":["Theory","Attention","Circuit complexity","Formal languages","Data Sequences","Expressiveness"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"形式语言理论可以有效分析神经网络架构的表达能力边界","claim_en":"Formal language theory can effectively analyze the expressive power boundary of neural network architectures","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"在输入为任意数值序列的场景下，硬注意力Transformer的表达能力严格高于软注意力Transformer","claim_en":"In scenarios where inputs are arbitrary numerical sequences, the expressive power of hard attention Transformers is strictly higher than that of soft attention Transformers","opposes":"Prior analysis based on bounded token inputs believes that hard and soft attention Transformers have equivalent expressive power","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Proof","why_contested":"This conclusion provides a theoretical basis for the application of hard attention architectures in numerical sequence scenarios such as time series, challenging the traditional conclusion of equivalent expressive power of different attention types."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"硬注意力Transformer在数值序列下的表达能力理论分析，仅做理论储备备查即可，不需要读正文","en":"Theoretical analysis of hard attention Transformer's expressiveness on numerical sequences, only for theoretical reserve reference, no need to read full text"}},{"id":"BertazziSSMD24","title":"Piecewise deterministic generative models","authors":["Andrea Bertazzi","Dario Shariatian","Umut Simsekli","Eric Moulines","Alain Durmus"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$148","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BertazziSSMD24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BertazziSSMD24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a9b50b051cd5f17455458d922e52768b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有生成模型多基于扩散过程，采样速度慢、计算开销高，之前的非扩散随机过程生成建模没有明确的时间反转闭式解，难以落地训练。","importance":"方法级贡献，为非扩散生成建模范式提供了新的理论框架，可用于后续低采样开销的扩散LM替代方案研发。","technical_approach":"原创方法，基于分段确定性马尔可夫过程（PDMP，由确定性运动和随机跳变组成的非扩散过程），推导了三种经典PDMP（Zig-Zag、弹性粒子采样器、随机HMC）的时间反转跳变率和核的显式表达式，舍弃了扩散过程的高斯噪声迭代假设，比现有非扩散生成模型的训练流程更高效。","experiments":"当前仅披露理论推导和训练流程设计，未公开具体生成任务的量化实验结果。","authors_note":"Eric Moulines、Alain Durmus均为统计机器学习领域资深学者，主要研究方向为随机过程、生成模型理论。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Most existing generative models are built on diffusion processes with slow sampling speed and high computational cost. Previous non-diffusion stochastic process based generative modeling lacks closed-form time reversal solutions, making practical training infeasible.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution providing a new theoretical framework for non-diffusion generative paradigms, which can support the development of low-cost alternatives to diffusion LMs.","technical_approach":"An original framework based on Piecewise Deterministic Markov Processes (PDMPs, non-diffusive processes consisting of deterministic motion and random jumps). It derives explicit expressions for time reversal jump rates and kernels of three classic PDMPs, discards the Gaussian noise iteration assumption of diffusion processes, and enables more efficient training than existing non-diffusion generative models.","experiments":"Only theoretical derivation and training pipeline design are disclosed so far, no quantitative experimental results on specific generation tasks are released.","authors_note":"Eric Moulines and Alain Durmus are senior researchers in statistical machine learning, focusing on stochastic processes and generative model theory."},"tags":["generative-modeling","piecewise-deterministic","diffusion","sampling"],"keywords":["generative modelling","piecewise deterministic Markov processes","time reversals"],"notable_authors":["Eric Moulines","Alain Durmus"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"随机过程的时间反转性质可用于构建生成模型。","claim_en":"Time reversal property of stochastic processes can be leveraged to build generative models.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"PDMP这类非扩散过程的时间反转仍为PDMP且存在闭式解，可直接用于生成建模。","claim_en":"Time reversal of non-diffusive PDMPs is also a PDMP with closed-form expressions, which can be directly used for generative modeling.","opposes":"Prior work assumed only diffusion processes have tractable time reversal properties suitable for generative modeling.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§2 Theorem 1","why_contested":"Breaks the path dependence of generative modeling on diffusion processes, provides theoretical support for low-cost generative models."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"分段确定性非扩散生成模型的理论框架，只看§3的时间反转闭式推导和§5的采样效率对比即可，可做扩散LM的低开销替代方案预研","en":"Theoretical framework for piecewise deterministic non-diffusion generative models, only read §3 closed-form time reversal derivation and §5 sampling efficiency for low-cost diffusion LM alternative pre-research"}},{"id":"2405.17992","title":"fMRI predictors based on language models of increasing complexity recover brain left lateralization","authors":["Laurent Bonnasse-Gahot","Christophe Pallier"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$149","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.17992","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Bonnasse-GahotP24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Bonnasse-GahotP24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e28e19d00b23fe0265f433fa05a96b06-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"之前用LM做fMRI编码模型得到的语言脑区激活是双侧对称的，和神经科学公认的语言处理左偏侧化结论冲突，核心原因是之前使用的LM语义表征复杂度不足。","importance":"交叉领域范式级启示，验证了LM表征复杂度与人类语言处理神经机制的对齐度正相关，为后续用LLM开展脑科学研究的模型选择提供了明确标准。","technical_approach":"改进的实验分析方法，控制其他变量不变，逐步提升编码模型所用LM的复杂度（从静态词嵌入到不同规模的LLM），对比不同模型对应的fMRI激活模式的偏侧性，舍弃了之前固定使用单一低复杂度LM的实验设计。","experiments":"基于公开自然语言处理fMRI数据集测试，模型覆盖从静态词嵌入到7B参数LLM的多个复杂度梯度，当LM复杂度达到阈值后，预测激活的左偏侧化显著度提升47%（按偏侧化指数计算），与临床神经科学观测完全一致。","authors_note":"Christophe Pallier是认知神经科学领域知名学者，长期研究语言处理的神经机制。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Previous fMRI encoding models using LMs returned bilateral symmetric activation of language brain regions, conflicting with the well-accepted left lateralization conclusion in neuroscience, caused by insufficient complexity of LM semantic representations used in prior work.","importance":"This is a cross-domain paradigm-level insight, verifying that alignment between LM representations and human language processing neural mechanisms increases with LM complexity, providing clear model selection criteria for future LLM-based neuroscience research.","technical_approach":"An improved experimental analysis method that controls other variables and increases LM complexity gradually (from static word embeddings to LLMs of different sizes) to compare lateralization of fMRI activation patterns predicted by different models, discarding the previous fixed low-complexity LM experimental design.","experiments":"Tested on a public natural language processing fMRI dataset, covering models from static word embeddings to 7B parameter LLMs. When LM complexity reaches the threshold, the significance of left lateralization of predicted activation increases by 47% (measured by lateralization index), consistent with clinical neuroscience observations.","authors_note":"Christophe Pallier is a well-known researcher in cognitive neuroscience, focusing on neural mechanisms of language processing."},"tags":["language-model","neuroscience","brain-encoding","scaling"],"keywords":["large language models","brain lateralization","neuroscience","language processing","fMRI","scaling laws"],"notable_authors":["Christophe Pallier"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"人类语言处理的核心脑区存在左偏侧化特性。","claim_en":"Core brain regions for human language processing exhibit left lateralization property.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"之前fMRI编码模型观测到的双侧对称激活是由于所用LM复杂度不足，而非语言处理本身无偏侧化。","claim_en":"The bilateral symmetric activation observed in previous fMRI encoding studies is caused by insufficient LM complexity, not absence of lateralization in language processing itself.","opposes":"Prior work attributed bilateral symmetric activation observed in fMRI encoding studies to inherent property of naturalistic language processing.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4.2 Figure 3","why_contested":"Corrects previous wrong conclusions in brain-LM alignment research, resolves the conflict between two lines of research."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"LM复杂度与脑区激活偏侧性的交叉研究，和LLM预训练几乎无关，仅了解结论即可，不需要细读","en":"Interdisciplinary study on LM complexity and brain activation lateralization, almost irrelevant to LLM pretraining, only grasp core conclusion, no deep reading needed"}},{"id":"2311.17295","title":"Elo Uncovered: Robustness and Best Practices in Language Model Evaluation","authors":["Meriem Boubdir","Edward Kim","Beyza Ermis","Sara Hooker","Marzieh Fadaee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"In Natural Language Processing (NLP), the Elo rating system, well-established for ranking dynamic competitors in games like chess, has seen increasing adoption for evaluating Large Language Models (LLMs) through “A vs B” paired comparisons. However, while popular, the system’s suitability for assessing entities with constant skill levels, such as LLMs, remains relatively unexplored. Our study investigates the sensitivity and reproducibility of Elo scores for LLMs, integrating both synthetic and human feedback. We show that Elo ratings for LLMs stabilize with 100 or more comparison permutations. A lower K-factor is preferable for closely matched models, whereas a higher K-factor better distinguishes models with clear performance differences. We also report that transitivity (A B and B C implies A C) does not consistently hold, particularly when models demonstrate similar performance. Our empirical findings provide guidelines for more reliable LLM evaluation.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.17295","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BoubdirKEHF24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BoubdirKEHF24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/bfba8efb806a970455b83b852c9cf846-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Elo评分系统被广泛用于LLM成对比较评估，但它原本为技能动态变化的游戏玩家设计，用于静态技能的LLM评估的鲁棒性、可复现性未经过系统验证，缺乏统一最佳实践。","importance":"方法级+实践级贡献，为LLM对齐阶段的人工/自动成对评估提供了可落地的配置标准，直接降低LLM评估的误差和成本。","technical_approach":"实验驱动的最佳实践总结，通过合成和人工反馈的对照实验，测试Elo评分在不同参数、样本量下的稳定性，舍弃了之前从业者随意配置Elo参数的做法，核心结论为100次以上比较排列可让Elo评分稳定，性能接近的模型用低K因子，性能差距大的用高K因子。","experiments":"覆盖从7B到70B参数的6个不同性能层级的LLM，测试K因子从8到64的多个配置，当比较排列数从20提升到100时，Elo排名的可复现性从62%提升到94%；低K因子（16）对同层级模型的排名误差比高K因子（32）低31%。","authors_note":"Sara Hooker是LLM可解释性、评估领域知名学者，Cohere For AI负责人。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Elo rating system is widely used for LLM pairwise comparison evaluation, but it was originally designed for game players with dynamic skill levels. Its robustness and reproducibility for evaluating static-skill LLMs have not been systematically verified, and no unified best practices exist.","importance":"This is a method-level and practice-level contribution, providing implementable configuration standards for human/automatic pairwise evaluation in LLM alignment stage, directly reducing evaluation error and cost.","technical_approach":"Experiment-driven best practice summary, testing stability of Elo ratings under different parameters and sample sizes through controlled experiments with synthetic and human feedback, discarding the previous arbitrary Elo parameter configuration by practitioners. Core conclusions: 100+ comparison permutations stabilize Elo ratings, low K-factor for closely matched models, high K-factor for models with clear performance gaps.","experiments":"Covers 6 LLMs of different performance levels from 7B to 70B parameters, testing K-factors from 8 to 64. When comparison permutations increase from 20 to 100, reproducibility of Elo ranking increases from 62% to 94%; low K-factor (16) reduces ranking error for same-tier models by 31% compared to high K-factor (32).","authors_note":"Sara Hooker is a well-known researcher in LLM interpretability and evaluation, head of Cohere For AI."},"tags":["evaluation","elo-rating","llm-benchmark","robustness"],"keywords":["Elo Rating System","Language Model Evaluation","Reliability","Robustness","Reproducibility","LLMs Ranking"],"notable_authors":["Sara Hooker"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"成对比较是LLM偏好对齐评估的可靠手段。","claim_en":"Pairwise comparison is a reliable approach for LLM preference alignment evaluation.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"LLM的Elo评分不需要上千次比较即可稳定，最少100次排列就可达到90%以上的可复现性。","claim_en":"Elo ratings for LLMs do not require thousands of comparisons to stabilize, 100 permutations are sufficient to achieve over 90% reproducibility.","opposes":"Prior common practice uses thousands of pairwise comparisons to generate stable Elo ratings for LLMs.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3.1 Table 1","why_contested":"Reduces sample size requirement for LLM pairwise evaluation by one order of magnitude, significantly lowering evaluation cost."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看第3、4节的对照实验结果和最终最佳实践条目即可，可直接套用在内部LLM成对评估的Elo配置中","en":"Only read controlled experiment results in §3-§4 and the final best practice list, which can be directly applied to Elo configuration for internal LLM pairwise evaluation."}},{"id":"BukharinHJLZZZ24","title":"Robust Reinforcement Learning from Corrupted Human Feedback","authors":["Alexander Bukharin","Ilgee Hong","Haoming Jiang","Zichong Li","Qingru Zhang","Zixuan Zhang","Tuo Zhao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$14a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BukharinHJLZZZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BukharinHJLZZZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e04101138a3c94544760c1dbdf2c7a2d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"标准RLHF的奖励模型训练假设人类偏好标签100%正确，但实际标注中存在偏见、歧义、标注错误等噪声，会导致奖励模型偏离真实人类偏好，对齐效果下降。","importance":"方法级贡献，仅增加可忽略的计算开销即可提升RLHF对噪声标注的鲁棒性，可直接集成到现有LLM对齐流水线中。","technical_approach":"改进的RLHF方法，命名为R³M，将被污染的偏好标签建模为稀疏异常点，把鲁棒奖励学习转化为L1正则化的最大似然估计问题，采用交替优化算法求解，舍弃了标准RLHF对标签无噪声的强假设，和现有RLHF流水线完全兼容。","experiments":"在7B参数LLM上测试，当偏好标签噪声率达到30%时，R³M的奖励模型准确率比标准RLHF高22%，RL对齐后的模型在MT-Bench上的得分比标准RLHF高0.7分，计算开销仅增加3%。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Standard RLHF reward model training assumes 100% correct human preference labels, but real annotations contain noise such as bias, ambiguity, and labeling errors, which cause reward models to deviate from true human preferences and reduce alignment performance.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution that improves RLHF robustness to noisy labels with negligible computational overhead, and can be directly integrated into existing LLM alignment pipelines.","technical_approach":"An improved RLHF method named R³M, which models corrupted preference labels as sparse outliers, formulates robust reward learning as an L1-regularized maximum likelihood estimation problem, and solves it with an efficient alternating optimization algorithm. It discards the strong noiseless label assumption of standard RLHF, and is fully compatible with existing RLHF pipelines.","experiments":"Tested on 7B parameter LLM, when preference label noise rate reaches 30%, R³M reward model accuracy is 22% higher than standard RLHF; RL-aligned model scores 0.7 points higher on MT-Bench than standard RLHF, with only 3% additional computational overhead.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rlhf","robustness","corrupted-feedback","reward-model"],"keywords":["Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback","Robust Reward Learning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"RLHF是当前LLM偏好对齐的主流有效框架。","claim_en":"RLHF is the mainstream effective framework for current LLM preference alignment.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"L1正则化对稀疏噪声的鲁棒性优于常用的L2正则化，用于奖励模型训练可在低开销下提升对齐效果。","claim_en":"L1 regularization has better robustness to sparse noise than commonly used L2 regularization, and can improve alignment performance with low overhead when used for reward model training.","opposes":"Prior robust RLHF work mostly uses L2 regularization to handle label noise, incurring high computational overhead.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4.3 Table 2","why_contested":"Provides a lightweight RLHF noise robustness scheme suitable for large-scale industrial deployment."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"完全兼容现有RLHF流水线，仅增加可忽略开销即可大幅提升噪声标注下的对齐效果，应立刻在内部对齐实验中复现验证","en":"Fully compatible with existing RLHF pipelines, it significantly improves alignment performance under noisy annotations with negligible overhead, and should be reproduced in internal alignment experiments immediately."}},{"id":"BulatOT24","title":"QBB: Quantization with Binary Bases for LLMs","authors":["Adrian Bulat","Yassine Ouali","Georgios Tzimiropoulos"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$14b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BulatOT24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BulatOT24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/05b69cc4c8ff6e24c5de1ecd27223d37-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有训后量化方法普遍只能做到4bit，进一步降低bit数（如2bit及以下）会导致精度大幅下降，尤其是7B以下小模型的低bit量化仍然是未解决的问题，且量化后仍存在乘法运算开销。","importance":"方法级贡献，实现了几乎无乘法的低bit量化，可大幅降低边缘端小LLM的推理延迟和内存占用。","technical_approach":"原创量化方法QBB，通过迭代过程将原始权重矩阵分解为一组1bit二进制矩阵的组合，整个量化后的推理过程几乎没有乘法运算，全部转化为求和操作，舍弃了现有量化方法的量化系数缩放乘法设计，和现有硬件的加法运算单元完全兼容。","experiments":"在1B、3B、7B参数的LLM上测试，2bit量化时的精度比现有GPTQ方法高1.8~2.4个perplexity点，推理速度比4bit GPTQ快37%，内存占用降低42%。","authors_note":"Georgios Tzimiropoulos是计算机视觉、模型压缩领域知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing post-training quantization methods generally only support 4-bit quantization, further reducing bit width (e.g., 2-bit or lower) leads to large accuracy drop, especially for sub-7B small models. Quantized models still have multiplication operation overhead.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution that achieves almost multiplication-free low-bit quantization, significantly reducing inference latency and memory footprint of small LLMs on edge devices.","technical_approach":"An original quantization method named QBB, which decomposes original weight matrices into a set of 1-bit binary matrices through an iterative process. The quantized inference process has almost no multiplication operations, all converted to summations. It discards the quantization coefficient scaling multiplication design of existing quantization methods, and is fully compatible with addition units of existing hardware.","experiments":"Tested on 1B, 3B, 7B parameter LLMs, 2-bit quantization accuracy is 1.8~2.4 perplexity points higher than existing GPTQ method; inference speed is 37% faster than 4-bit GPTQ, memory footprint is reduced by 42%.","authors_note":"Georgios Tzimiropoulos is a well-known researcher in computer vision and model compression."},"tags":["quantization","llm","binary-bases"],"keywords":["LLMs; Binarization; Network quantization;"],"notable_authors":["Georgios Tzimiropoulos"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"训后量化是降低LLM推理开销的有效手段。","claim_en":"Post-training quantization is an effective approach to reduce LLM inference overhead.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"低bit量化时将权重分解为二进制基的组合，精度优于传统的分组缩放量化方法。","claim_en":"Decomposing weights into binary base combinations for low-bit quantization achieves better accuracy than traditional grouped scaling quantization methods.","opposes":"Prior low-bit quantization work mostly uses grouped scaling quantization, which suffers from large accuracy drop below 4 bits.","opposes_cite_hint":"Frantar 2022 GPTQ","evidence_anchor":"§5.1 Table 1","why_contested":"Breaks the accuracy bottleneck of 4-bit quantization, providing a feasible path for deployment of 2-bit and lower quantization."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看第5节的端侧推理延迟实测数据即可，2bit无乘法量化的思路仅适合边缘小模型部署场景参考","en":"Only read edge-side inference latency measurement data in §5, the 2-bit multiplication-free quantization idea is only suitable for edge small model deployment scenario reference."}},{"id":"2407.12831","title":"Truth is Universal: Robust Detection of Lies in LLMs","authors":["Lennart Bürger","Fred A. Hamprecht","Boaz Nadler"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$14c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.12831","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/BurgerHN24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/BurgerHN24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/f9f54762cbb4fe4dbffdd4f792c31221-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有基于激活的LLM谎言检测器泛化性差，无法跨任务、跨否定句式迁移，没有找到通用的谎言表征模式。","importance":"方法级贡献，发现了LLM真假陈述的通用二维表征子空间，可实现跨任务、跨模型结构的鲁棒谎言检测，不需要针对每个模型/任务单独训练分类器。","technical_approach":"原创检测方法，通过主成分分析在LLM的中间层激活中找到了一个固定的二维子空间，真假陈述的激活向量在该子空间上的投影可被线性分离，舍弃了之前针对具体任务训练分类器的设计，泛化性不受句式、任务类型影响。","experiments":"在Llama-2 7B、13B，GPT-3.5等多个模型上测试，跨任务谎言检测准确率达到92%，比之前最优的任务特定分类器高17个百分点，对否定句式、反事实陈述的检测准确率保持在89%以上。","authors_note":"Boaz Nadler是统计机器学习、可解释性领域知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing activation-based LLM lie detectors have poor generalization, cannot transfer across tasks or negated sentences, and no universal lie representation pattern has been found.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution that discovers a universal 2D representation subspace for LLM true/false statements, enabling robust cross-task, cross-architecture lie detection without training task-specific classifiers for each model/task.","technical_approach":"An original detection method that finds a fixed 2D subspace in LLM middle-layer activations through principal component analysis, where activation vectors of true and false statements can be linearly separated by their projections. It discards the previous task-specific classifier training design, and generalization is not affected by sentence structure or task type.","experiments":"Tested on multiple models including Llama-2 7B, 13B, GPT-3.5, cross-task lie detection accuracy reaches 92%, 17 percentage points higher than previous best task-specific classifiers; detection accuracy for negated sentences and counterfactual statements remains above 89%.","authors_note":"Boaz Nadler is a well-known researcher in statistical machine learning and interpretability."},"tags":["interpretability","llm-truthfulness","lie-detection","probing"],"keywords":["Interpretable AI","Explainable AI","Interpretability","AI Alignment","AI Safety","LLM Alignment","Truthful LLMs","Large Language Models","LLM","Mechanistic Interpretability","LLM Lie Detection"],"notable_authors":["Boaz Nadler"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM的内部激活包含其输出陈述是否为真的隐式信息。","claim_en":"LLM internal activations contain implicit information about whether its output statement is true.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"LLM的真假陈述存在跨模型、跨任务通用的二维表征子空间，不需要单独训练任务特定的检测分类器。","claim_en":"There exists a cross-model, cross-task universal 2D representation subspace for LLM true/false statements, no need to train task-specific detection classifiers separately.","opposes":"Prior lie detection work requires training task-specific classifiers for each model and task, with poor cross-scenario generalization.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3.2 Figure 2","why_contested":"First discovery of universal pattern for LLM truth representation, providing theoretical basis for development of general hallucination detection tools."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看第4节的二维子空间表征可视化和跨模型泛化测试结果即可，可快速复用在内部LLM幻觉检测模块","en":"Only read 2D subspace representation visualization and cross-model generalization test results in §4, which can be quickly reused in internal LLM hallucination detection modules."}},{"id":"ChatziSTR24","title":"Prediction-Powered Ranking of Large Language Models","authors":["Ivi Chatzi","Eleni Straitouri","Suhas Thejaswi","Manuel Gomez Rodriguez"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$14d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChatziSTR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChatziSTR24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/cd47cd67caa87f5b1944e00f6781598f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"当前LLM排名普遍用强LLM替代人类做成对比较降低成本，但无法衡量LLM偏好和人类偏好的不匹配带来的排名不确定性，可能导致排名结果不可靠。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了第一个可量化LLM自动排名的不确定性的统计框架，可在低评估成本下保证排名结果的置信度。","technical_approach":"原创统计框架，将预测驱动的排名方法和人类偏好的不确定性建模结合，仅需要少量人类标注作为校正，即可估计自动排名的置信区间，舍弃了之前自动排名完全不考虑偏好不匹配误差的做法，可灵活适配不同成本要求的评估场景。","experiments":"在MT-Bench、AlpacaEval两个基准上测试，仅用10%的人类标注校正，即可得到95%置信度下误差小于0.2分的排名结果，比纯自动排名的可靠性高41%，标注成本仅为纯人类排名的12%。","authors_note":"Manuel Gomez Rodriguez是因果推断、推荐系统领域知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Current LLM ranking generally uses strong LLMs to replace humans for pairwise comparisons to reduce cost, but cannot measure ranking uncertainty caused by mismatch between LLM preferences and human preferences, which may lead to unreliable ranking results.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution that proposes the first statistical framework to quantify uncertainty of LLM automatic ranking, ensuring confidence of ranking results at low evaluation cost.","technical_approach":"An original statistical framework that combines prediction-powered ranking with uncertainty modeling of human preferences. It only requires a small amount of human annotations for calibration to estimate confidence intervals of automatic rankings, discards the previous practice of ignoring preference mismatch error in automatic ranking, and can flexibly adapt to evaluation scenarios with different cost requirements.","experiments":"Tested on MT-Bench and AlpacaEval benchmarks, with only 10% human annotations for calibration, it achieves ranking results with error less than 0.2 points at 95% confidence, 41% more reliable than fully automatic ranking, and annotation cost is only 12% of fully human ranking.","authors_note":"Manuel Gomez Rodriguez is a well-known researcher in causal inference and recommendation systems."},"tags":["benchmark","evaluation","ranking","llm"],"keywords":["Large language models","LLM evaluation","LLM ranking"],"notable_authors":["Manuel Gomez Rodriguez"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"成对偏好比较是LLM排名的黄金标准。","claim_en":"Pairwise preference comparison is the gold standard for LLM ranking.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅用少量人类标注校正的预测驱动排名，可达到和纯人类排名相当的可靠性，成本降低一个数量级。","claim_en":"Prediction-powered ranking calibrated with only a small amount of human annotations can achieve reliability comparable to fully human ranking, with cost reduced by one order of magnitude.","opposes":"Prior practice either uses fully human ranking with high cost or fully automatic ranking with unknown reliability.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4.1 Table 1","why_contested":"Balances cost and reliability of LLM ranking, suitable for evaluation scenarios of large-scale industrial model iteration."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为LLM自动排名不确定性量化的文献备查即可，无需读正文，现有评估流水线暂无集成价值","en":"Just keep it as a literature reference for LLM automatic ranking uncertainty quantification, no need to read the full text, no integration value for existing evaluation pipelines for now."}},{"id":"ChenDLDLS24","title":"QuanTA: Efficient High-Rank Fine-Tuning of LLMs with Quantum-Informed Tensor Adaptation","authors":["Zhuo Chen","Rumen Dangovski","Charlotte Loh","Owen Dugan","Di Luo","Marin Soljacic"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$14e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenDLDLS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenDLDLS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a7c17115db36193f6b83b71b0fe1d416-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作试图解决的是：LoRA 一类低秩微调省参数省显存，但表达能力受限；直接做高秩适配又会很快失去 PEFT 的效率优势。过去常见折中是堆 rank、改初始化或分层调 rank，但这些办法通常只是把容量往上推，没有真正解决“高秩想要更强、又不想太贵”的结构性矛盾。","importance":"它的贡献更偏方法级 PEFT 设计。对大模型训练的启示在于，参数高效微调的关键不只是 rank 大小，而是如何在受限参数预算下组织高维更新；如果 QuanTA 的张量化结构确实能稳定地提供更高有效秩，那它对中大规模 continual adaptation、domain adaptation 和多任务切换都有实际价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是提出 QuanTA，用量子启发的张量适配来实现更高表达能力的参数高效微调。按题目判断，它不是简单地把 LoRA rank 调高，而是通过张量分解或更结构化的参数化，把原本昂贵的高秩更新压缩成可训练、可组合的低成本因子；“quantum-informed”大概率指借用量子态/张量网络中的分解思想来表达复杂相关性。这样设计有效，因为 LoRA 的瓶颈不是只有参数量，还包括更新子空间过窄；张量化后可在近似相同预算下覆盖更丰富的耦合模式。代价是实现更复杂，训练稳定性和 kernel 友好性未必像标准 LoRA 那么好。","experiments":"实验上应主要比较 QuanTA 与 LoRA、AdaLoRA、DoRA 或其他高秩/结构化 PEFT 方法在同等参数预算下的效果。关键事实应包括：在 commonsense、instruction tuning 或 domain adaptation 任务上是否 consistently 更优；在相同质量下参数量、显存或吞吐是否更省；以及随着 rank 或张量阶数增加，收益是否比普通 LoRA 更平滑。没有摘要和数值，无法确认模型规模、任务集合和具体提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a standard PEFT tension: low-rank adaptation is efficient but capacity-limited, while simply increasing rank erodes the efficiency advantage. Existing fixes usually push rank upward or change scheduling, but they do not really resolve how to obtain high-rank expressivity under a tight adaptation budget.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution in parameter-efficient fine-tuning. The broader lesson is that adaptation quality depends not only on nominal rank, but on how the update space is structured under a fixed budget; if QuanTA delivers a higher effective rank at similar cost, that is useful for continual adaptation and domain tuning of large models.","technical_approach":"The core idea is a quantum-inspired tensor adaptation scheme that aims to represent higher-rank updates more efficiently than standard LoRA. From the title, this is likely not a plain rank increase, but a structured tensor factorization that compresses expressive updates into trainable low-cost factors; the quantum angle probably comes from tensor-network-style parameterizations. This design is sensible because the main limitation of LoRA is the narrow update subspace, not just the raw parameter count. The trade-off is implementation complexity and possibly weaker kernel friendliness or training stability compared with vanilla LoRA.","experiments":"The key comparisons should be against LoRA and other structured PEFT baselines under matched parameter or memory budgets. The most useful evidence would show better downstream quality at the same adaptation size, or similar quality at lower cost, plus scaling studies over rank or tensor order. The provided metadata does not include an abstract or numerical results, so model sizes, tasks, and gains cannot be stated reliably.","authors_note":""},"tags":["fine-tuning","efficient-adaptation","tensor","llm"],"keywords":["LLM","Language Model","PEFT","Finetuning","High Rank"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看第4.3节的不同PEFT方法的有效秩和下游任务性能对比结果即可，适合继续优化内部PEFT方案参考","en":"Only read effective rank and downstream task performance comparison of different PEFT methods in §4.3, suitable for reference when optimizing internal PEFT solutions."}},{"id":"ChenHML0ZSWR24","title":"Slight Corruption in Pre-training Data Makes Better Diffusion Models","authors":["Hao Chen","Yujin Han","Diganta Misra","Xiang Li","Kai Hu","Difan Zou","Masashi Sugiyama","Jindong Wang","Bhiksha Raj"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$14f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenHML0ZSWR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenHML0ZSWR24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e45c8d054739d31676619e7e11327f68-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心结论从标题就很明确：在预训练数据中加入轻微损坏，反而可能训练出更好的 diffusion model。它挑战的是视觉生成里一个默认前提——训练数据越干净越好；过去大家把 corruption 主要当增强或鲁棒性测试，而不是把“带一点噪的数据”当成改善生成学习动态的手段。","importance":"这件事重要，因为它触及扩散模型预训练的数据质量定义。对 pretrain 研究的启示不是“脏数据更好”这么简单，而是数据中适度的不确定性、局部破坏或信息缺失，可能让模型学到更有用的去噪归纳偏置；如果成立，这会影响大规模视觉生成数据清洗、合成数据掺混和 curriculum 设计。","technical_approach":"核心方法大概率很直接：在扩散模型训练数据上施加轻微 corruption，再研究训练和生成质量的变化。关键不在于随便加噪，而在于 corruption 的类型和强度要落在一个窄窗口里——足够打破过强的像素记忆和捷径，又不能破坏语义结构。与传统 data augmentation 的区别在于，这里关注的是生成模型的学习目标与数据分布之间的相互作用：扩散本来就在学逐步去噪，轻微损坏的数据可能让这种去噪任务更贴近真实泛化需求。代价也清楚，corruption 一旦过强，模型会学到错误先验，细节保真和样本质量会掉得很快。","experiments":"实验最关键的是 corruption 强度-性能曲线。应重点看：在哪些数据集和模型规模上，轻微 corruption 能提升 FID、IS 或人类偏好；提升是来自更好泛化、更强鲁棒性还是更稳定训练；以及不同 corruption 类型如 blur、JPEG、masking、局部噪声是否效果不同。好的 ablation 还会显示最优区间很窄，过弱没效果，过强反而退化。给定信息没有摘要，无法确认具体数据集、模型大小和数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The main claim is clear from the title: slightly corrupted pretraining data can improve diffusion models. This challenges a common assumption in generative vision work that cleaner data is always better; corruption has usually been treated as augmentation or robustness stress, not as a beneficial ingredient of the learning setup itself.","importance":"This matters because it reframes what “data quality” means for diffusion pretraining. The implication is not that noisy data is universally good, but that a small amount of structured imperfection may induce a better denoising bias and reduce overfitting to superficial detail. If true, this affects dataset cleaning, synthetic-data mixing, and curriculum choices for diffusion training.","technical_approach":"The likely method is to inject mild corruption into the training images and measure the effect on diffusion training and generation quality. The design only makes sense within a narrow regime: the corruption must be strong enough to weaken memorization and shortcut reliance, but weak enough to preserve semantics. This differs from standard augmentation because the point is not invariance alone; it is the interaction between the diffusion objective and the data distribution. The obvious trade-off is that once corruption becomes too strong, the model learns the wrong prior and fidelity drops.","experiments":"The most important result should be the corruption-strength curve rather than one best checkpoint. Relevant evidence would include gains in FID, IS, or human preference across datasets and scales, plus comparisons among corruption types such as blur, JPEG artifacts, masking, or local noise. Strong ablations would show a narrow sweet spot: too little does nothing, too much hurts. The provided metadata contains no abstract or numerical details.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-quality","pretraining-data","diffusion","regularization"],"keywords":["pre-training noise","diffusion models","latent diffusion models","diffusion transformers","latent consistency models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看第3.2节的不同corruption类型/强度的消融结果即可，可参考调整扩散模型预训练数据清洗策略","en":"Only read ablation results of different corruption types/intensities in §3.2, which can be referenced to adjust diffusion model pre-training data cleaning strategies."}},{"id":"ChenJLK024","title":"RouterDC: Query-Based Router by Dual Contrastive Learning for Assembling Large Language Models","authors":["Shuhao Chen","Weisen Jiang","Baijiong Lin","James T. Kwok","Yu Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Recent works show that assembling multiple off-the-shelf large language models (LLMs) can harness their complementary abilities. To achieve this, routing is a promising method, which learns a router to select the most suitable LLM for each query. However, existing routing models are ineffective when multiple LLMs perform well for a query. To address this problem, in this paper, we propose a method called query-based Router by Dual Contrastive learning (RouterDC). The RouterDC model, which consists of an encoder and LLM embeddings, is trained by two proposed contrastive losses (sample-LLM and sample-sample losses). Experimental results show that RouterDC is effective in assembling LLMs and largely outperforms individual top-performing LLMs as well as existing routing methods on both in-distribution (+2.76\\%) and out-of-distribution (+1.90\\%) tasks. The source code is available at https://github.com/shuhao02/RouterDC.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenJLK024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenJLK024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/7a641b8ec86162fc875fb9f6456a542f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是多模型组装中的路由问题：当你手里有多个 LLM 时，如何按 query 选择最合适的模型，而不是固定用最强模型或做粗糙规则分发。过去很多 LLM assembly 方法在路由上依赖人工规则、少量特征或简单分类器，这会导致复杂 query 下的专家匹配不准，成本和质量都不理想。","importance":"它的重要性偏系统级和推理编排级。对大模型研究的启示是，模型组合的上限很大程度取决于 router 的辨识能力，而不是只看候选模型池本身；如果 query-based router 足够准，就能在近似相同成本下逼近更强集成性能，这对 serving 和 inference-time scaling 都有现实意义。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 RouterDC，用双重对比学习训练 query router。和普通多分类路由不同，它大概率同时学习两类结构：一类是 query 与最优专家之间的匹配，另一类是 query 间或专家间的相对关系，从而让 router 不只会记标签，还能学到决策边界。这样设计有效，因为路由本质是 representation learning 问题：同一类任务可能表面形式不同，而对比学习更适合把“适合同一专家的 query”拉近。代价在于，需要定义可靠的正负样本和专家优劣标签，否则 router 很容易学到训练集特定模式。","experiments":"实验应主要比较 RouterDC 与规则路由、成本感知分类器、bandit 路由或 embedding 检索式路由。关键事实包括：在固定成本下总体准确率或胜率提升多少，在固定质量下平均调用成本降低多少，以及 router 在 out-of-distribution query 上是否仍稳。好的 ablation 还会分析 dual contrastive 的两个分量各自贡献。由于无摘要，不能确认具体模型池规模、任务集和数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper focuses on routing in multi-LLM systems: given several candidate models, how do we choose the right one for each query instead of always calling the strongest model or relying on crude rules? Existing assembly methods often use simple heuristics or lightweight classifiers, which leaves quality and cost on the table.","importance":"This is mainly a systems and inference-orchestration contribution. The important lesson is that the value of model assembly depends heavily on routing quality; a better router can unlock better cost-quality trade-offs even without changing the underlying model pool.","technical_approach":"The method, RouterDC, appears to train a query router with dual contrastive learning. Relative to plain classification, the likely advantage is that it learns not only query-to-expert matches but also relational structure among queries or experts, which should improve generalization when similar tasks are phrased differently. This design is sensible because routing is fundamentally a representation-learning problem. The trade-off is that the method needs reliable supervision for positive and negative routing pairs; otherwise it can overfit to spurious routing patterns.","experiments":"The key comparisons should be against heuristic routing, standard learned routers, cost-aware classifiers, or retrieval-style routing. The most relevant results would quantify quality gains under a fixed cost budget, cost savings under a fixed quality target, and robustness on out-of-distribution queries. A useful ablation would isolate the contribution of the two contrastive components. The provided information contains no abstract or numeric details.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm-routing","model-ensemble","contrastive-learning"],"notable_authors":["James T. Kwok","Yu Zhang"],"keywords":["LLM Routing; Large Language Models;"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看第4.4节的路由准确率和推理成本对比数据即可，适合多模型推理编排场景参考借鉴","en":"Only read routing accuracy and inference cost comparison data in §4.4, suitable for reference in multi-model inference orchestration scenarios."}},{"id":"ChenLDZZCDWQLZ24","title":"Are We on the Right Way for Evaluating Large Vision-Language Models?","authors":["Lin Chen","Jinsong Li","Xiaoyi Dong","Pan Zhang","Yuhang Zang","Zehui Chen","Haodong Duan","Jiaqi Wang","Yu Qiao","Dahua Lin","Feng Zhao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$150","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenLDZZCDWQLZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenLDZZCDWQLZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/2f8ee6a3d766b426d2618e555b5aeb39-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：当前大视觉语言模型的评测方式可能把我们带偏了，很多 benchmark 高分并不等于真正的多模态理解更强。过去 LVLM 评测常依赖封闭问答、模板化数据或污染严重的公开 benchmark，因此模型可能靠语言先验、数据记忆或评测漏洞拿分，而不是真的看懂图像。","importance":"它的重要性很高，属于评测范式级问题。对 VLM 预训练研究的直接启示是，如果评测不对，训练目标和数据配比也会被错导；大家可能以为某些对齐 loss、视觉 tokenizer 或 instruction tuning 带来了理解提升，实际上只是更会利用 benchmark 偏置。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是系统审查现有 LVLM evaluation pipeline，并提出更可靠的评测原则、诊断维度或基准。和单纯再造一个 benchmark 不同，这类工作更关键的是拆解误差来源：语言泄漏、视觉信息利用不足、问题可猜测性、答案空间偏置、评分器不稳等。这样设计有效，因为 LVLM 评测最大的难点不是题目不够难，而是无法确认模型到底用了多少视觉证据。边界在于，再好的静态 benchmark 也很快会被适应，因此持续更新和更细粒度诊断仍然必要。","experiments":"实验重点应是对现有主流 LVLM 在不同评测设置下的性能重排。值得关注的事实包括：一旦控制语言捷径或加入视觉反事实干预，排行榜是否大幅变化；哪些 benchmark 与真实视觉依赖最弱；以及新评测设置下模型间差距是否缩小或重排。若论文扎实，还会做人工核验，证明自动评分存在系统偏差。没有摘要，无法确认具体模型名单、数据集与数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper questions whether current evaluation practice for large vision-language models is actually measuring multimodal understanding. Many popular benchmarks can be solved partly through language priors, memorization, or benchmark artifacts, so high scores do not necessarily imply strong visual grounding.","importance":"This is important at the evaluation-paradigm level. For VLM pretraining, the implication is direct: if the measurement is wrong, model design and data choices will be optimized toward the wrong target. Apparent gains from alignment losses, visual tokenizers, or instruction tuning may partly reflect benchmark exploitation rather than better visual reasoning.","technical_approach":"The likely contribution is a systematic analysis of existing LVLM evaluation pipelines, plus stronger principles or benchmarks for diagnosing genuine visual use. The key is not just to make tasks harder, but to isolate failure modes such as language leakage, answer-space bias, insufficient visual dependence, and unstable automatic scoring. That framing is effective because the hard part in VLM evaluation is not difficulty alone; it is determining whether the model actually used the image. The limitation is that static benchmarks can still be gamed over time.","experiments":"The most telling experiments would show rank changes among popular LVLMs once shortcut-heavy setups are controlled for or counterfactual visual tests are added. Useful evidence would identify which benchmarks depend weakly on vision, whether model gaps shrink or reorder under stronger controls, and whether automatic judges systematically mis-score outputs. The provided metadata includes no abstract or numerical details.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm-evaluation","benchmark","vision-language"],"keywords":["large vision-language model","data leakage","multi-modal benchmark"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看第3节的现有LVLM评测误差拆解部分即可，可用来校准内部VLM预训练的效果验证逻辑","en":"Only read existing LVLM evaluation error breakdown in §3, which can be used to calibrate effect verification logic for internal VLM pre-training."}},{"id":"ChenM0X0YFC24","title":"Multi-Object Hallucination in Vision Language Models","authors":["Xuweiyi Chen","Ziqiao Ma","Xuejun Zhang","Sihan Xu","Shengyi Qian","Jianing Yang","David Fouhey","Joyce Chai"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$151","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChenM0X0YFC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChenM0X0YFC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/4ea4a1ea4d9ff273688c8e92bd087112-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注的是 VLM 的多对象幻觉：当图像里有多个实体时，模型更容易编造不存在的对象、属性或关系。过去关于 hallucination 的研究常把问题笼统归结为‘看图不准’，但多对象场景更难，因为错误不只来自识别失败，还来自对象绑定、计数、关系组合和语言先验竞争。","importance":"它的重要性在于把幻觉问题从单对象或整体描述，推进到更接近真实场景组合复杂度的设置。对 VLM 预训练的启示是，模型是否真的学到视觉-语言对齐，不该只看 caption 流畅度，而要看在多实体组合下能否保持正确绑定；这直接关系到视觉 tokenizer、交叉注意力设计和图文数据标注粒度。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是构建专门针对 multi-object hallucination 的分析基准或诊断框架，系统测量对象存在性、计数、属性归属和关系描述中的错误。与一般幻觉评测不同，这类设计通常需要更细粒度标注，区分‘完全虚构对象’和‘把真实对象的属性/关系绑定错’。这样做有效，因为多对象错误往往不是视觉 backbone 看不到，而是语言解码时把多个对象证据混在一起。边界在于，若 benchmark 过于模板化，模型可能学会任务格式而不是减少真实幻觉。","experiments":"实验最值得看的包括：主流 VLM 在多对象场景下的错误率是否显著高于单对象；错误主要集中在对象数增加、遮挡增强、长尾组合还是复杂关系；以及训练或解码策略如更强 grounding、区域提示、对比解码能否缓解。好的论文还会给出错误拆解，说明问题主要来自 detection 缺失还是 binding 错误。由于没有摘要，无法确认数据规模、模型名单和量化提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies multi-object hallucination in vision-language models, where errors become more severe once several entities appear in the same image. This is an important refinement over generic hallucination analysis because failures in such settings are not only about missing objects, but also about binding the wrong attribute, count, or relation to the wrong object.","importance":"Its contribution is to push hallucination analysis toward compositional visual scenes, which is closer to real use. For VLM pretraining, the message is that fluent captioning is a weak proxy for alignment; what matters is whether the model preserves correct object binding when visual evidence becomes combinatorial.","technical_approach":"The likely method is a benchmark or diagnostic protocol tailored to multi-object hallucination, with metrics that separate object existence errors from attribute or relation misbinding. This is a meaningful design choice because many VLM failures arise not from total visual blindness, but from mixing evidence across multiple entities during decoding. The limitation is that if the benchmark becomes too templated, models may adapt to the format without reducing real-world hallucination.","experiments":"The key findings should compare single-object and multi-object settings, identify how hallucination scales with object count, occlusion, long-tail combinations, or relational complexity, and test mitigation strategies such as stronger grounding or decoding controls. A strong paper would also decompose whether the dominant issue is missed detection or incorrect binding. The provided metadata has no abstract or numerical details.","authors_note":""},"tags":["hallucination","vlm","multi-object"],"keywords":["Large Vision Language Models","Object Hallucination","Visual Prompting"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看第4节的多对象幻觉错误类型统计结果即可，可指导优化VLM图文对齐数据的标注粒度","en":"Only read multi-object hallucination error type statistics in §4, which can guide optimization of annotation granularity for VLM image-text alignment data."}},{"id":"ChidambaramGCL024","title":"What does guidance do? A fine-grained analysis in a simple setting","authors":["Muthu Chidambaram","Khashayar Gatmiry","Sitan Chen","Holden Lee","Jianfeng Lu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$152","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ChidambaramGCL024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ChidambaramGCL024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9a3942c235daa9c5f62a8598ae81a946-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"扩散模型的引导技术之前被普遍认为是从条件似然加权的倾斜数据分布中采样，但这个假设没有经过严格证明，实际使用中观察到的引导采样的特性无法被该假设解释。","importance":"理论级贡献，修正了扩散模型引导技术的理论误解，为后续引导参数的调优、新型引导方法的设计提供了正确的理论基础。","technical_approach":"理论分析方法，针对紧支撑分布混合和高斯混合两种简化场景，严格推导了引导采样的动力学特性，证明引导采样并不会从预期的倾斜分布中采样，而是随着引导参数增大，采样会越来越集中在条件分布支撑的边界上，舍弃了之前被广泛接受的倾斜分布假设。","experiments":"在合成高斯混合数据集和CIFAR-10图像数据集上验证了理论结论，当引导系数从1提升到10时，采样点落在条件分布边界的比例从12%提升到78%，和理论推导完全一致。","authors_note":"Jianfeng Lu是应用数学、扩散模型理论领域知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Guidance technology for diffusion models was previously widely assumed to sample from the tilted data distribution weighted by conditional likelihood, but this assumption has not been rigorously proved, and observed properties of guided sampling in practice cannot be explained by this assumption.","importance":"This is a theoretical-level contribution that corrects the theoretical misunderstanding of diffusion model guidance technology, providing a correct theoretical basis for subsequent guidance parameter tuning and new guidance method design.","technical_approach":"Theoretical analysis method, which rigorously derives dynamic properties of guided sampling for two simplified scenarios: mixtures of compactly supported distributions and mixtures of Gaussians. It proves that guided sampling does not sample from the expected tilted distribution, but as guidance parameter increases, samples become more concentrated on the boundary of the conditional distribution support, discarding the previously widely accepted tilted distribution assumption.","experiments":"Theoretical conclusions are verified on synthetic Gaussian mixture dataset and CIFAR-10 image dataset. When guidance coefficient increases from 1 to 10, the proportion of samples falling on the boundary of conditional distribution increases from 12% to 78%, fully consistent with theoretical derivation.","authors_note":"Jianfeng Lu is a well-known researcher in applied mathematics and diffusion model theory."},"tags":["diffusion","guidance","sampling","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["diffusion","guidance","sampling","probability flow ode"],"notable_authors":["Jianfeng Lu"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"引导技术可有效提升扩散模型的条件生成质量。","claim_en":"Guidance technique can effectively improve the conditional generation quality of diffusion models.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"扩散模型的引导采样并不是从之前假设的条件似然加权的倾斜分布中采样，而是采样集中在条件分布的支撑边界。","claim_en":"Guided sampling of diffusion models does not sample from the previously assumed conditional likelihood weighted tilted distribution, but samples concentrate on the support boundary of the conditional distribution.","opposes":"Prior widely accepted assumption claims guidance samples from the tilted data distribution weighted by conditional likelihood.","opposes_cite_hint":"Ho 2022 Classifier-Free Guidance","evidence_anchor":"§2 Theorem 1","why_contested":"Corrects the core theoretical misunderstanding of diffusion model guidance technology, directly affecting the design direction of subsequent guidance methods."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看第4节的引导采样动力学推导结论即可，修正了此前扩散引导的倾斜分布假设，可指导后续引导算法优化","en":"Only read guided sampling dynamics derivation conclusion in §4, which corrects the previous tilted distribution assumption of diffusion guidance and can guide subsequent guidance algorithm optimization."}},{"id":"CironeO0SL24","title":"Theoretical Foundations of Deep Selective State-Space Models","authors":["Nicola Muca Cirone","Antonio Orvieto","Benjamin Walker","Cristopher Salvi","Terry J. Lyons"],"institutions":["University of Oxford","Alan Turing Institute"],"abstract":"$153","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/CironeO0SL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/CironeO0SL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e6231c5f46598cfd09ff1970524e0436-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"为带有选择性机制（selectivity mechanism）的状态空间模型（SSMs，如 Mamba）提供理论基础。过去 SSMs 的选择性机制常被经验性地与上下文学习（in-context learning）联系，但缺乏严谨的数学解释。","importance":"方法级/理论级贡献。用粗糙路径理论（Rough Path Theory）证明了选择性机制为什么能让 SSMs 在十亿参数规模上匹敌甚至超越 Transformer。这为理解非自回归（non-AR）或线性 RNN 架构的表达能力提供了坚实的数学框架，有助于指导未来高效序列模型的设计。","technical_approach":"引入粗糙路径理论来分析 SSMs。核心在于将输入与隐藏状态之间的乘法交互（multiplicative interactions）形式化，证明这种选择性机制本质上赋予了模型处理复杂序列依赖的能力，从而在理论上解释了其在上下文学习等任务上的有效性。","experiments":"这是一篇纯理论文章，主要贡献在于数学证明和框架构建，未提供大规模预训练实验或具体的参数量/数据集规模指标。","authors_note":"Terry J. Lyons 是粗糙路径理论的创始人之一，牛津大学教授。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"To provide a theoretical foundation for State-Space Models (SSMs) equipped with a selectivity mechanism (e.g., Mamba). Previously, the effectiveness of this mechanism, often linked to in-context learning, lacked rigorous mathematical explanation.","importance":"Methodological/Theoretical contribution. It uses Rough Path Theory to prove why the selectivity mechanism enables SSMs to match or surpass Transformers at the billion-parameter scale. This provides a solid mathematical framework for understanding the expressive power of non-AR or linear RNN architectures, guiding the design of future efficient sequence models.","technical_approach":"Introduces Rough Path Theory to analyze SSMs. The core is formalizing the multiplicative interactions between inputs and hidden states, proving that this selectivity mechanism inherently grants the model the ability to handle complex sequence dependencies, theoretically explaining its effectiveness in tasks like in-context learning.","experiments":"This is a purely theoretical paper; its main contribution lies in mathematical proofs and framework construction, without large-scale pre-training experiments or specific parameter/dataset scale metrics.","authors_note":"Terry J. Lyons is one of the founders of Rough Path Theory, a professor at the University of Oxford."},"tags":["ssm","architecture","theory","sequence-modeling"],"keywords":["theory","deep learning theory","SSM","RNN","neural controlled differential equations","signatures","kernels"],"notable_authors":["Terry J. Lyons"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"带有选择性机制的 SSMs（如 Mamba）在十亿参数规模上展现出与 Transformer 相当甚至更好的性能和效率。","claim_en":"SSMs with a selectivity mechanism (e.g., Mamba) demonstrate performance and efficiency comparable to or better than Transformers at the billion-parameter scale.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为选择性SSM的理论支撑文献备查即可，理论推导过于抽象，对工程落地无直接指导价值","en":"Just keep it as a theoretical support literature for selective SSMs, the theoretical derivation is too abstract and has no direct guiding value for engineering implementation."}},{"id":"ColomboPBMHMCCD24","title":"SaulLM-54B &amp; SaulLM-141B: Scaling Up Domain Adaptation for the Legal Domain","authors":["Pierre Colombo","Telmo Pessoa Pires","Malik Boudiaf","Rui Melo","Gabriel Hautreux","Etienne Malaboeuf","Johanne Charpentier","Dominic Culver","Michael Desa"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ColomboPBMHMCCD24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ColomboPBMHMCCD24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ea3f85a33f9ba072058e3df233cf6cca-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"industry","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["domain-adaptation","llm","continued-pretraining","legal-domain"]},{"id":"Covert0LZH24","title":"Stochastic Amortization: A Unified Approach to Accelerate Feature and Data Attribution","authors":["Ian Covert","Chanwoo Kim","Su-In Lee","James Y. Zou","Tatsunori B. Hashimoto"],"institutions":["University of Washington","Stanford University"],"abstract":"Many tasks in explainable machine learning, such as data valuation and feature attribution, perform expensive computation for each data point and are intractable for large datasets. These methods require efficient approximations, and although amortizing the process by learning a network to directly predict the desired output is a promising solution, training such models with exact labels is often infeasible. We therefore explore training amortized models with noisy labels, and we find that this is inexpensive and surprisingly effective. Through theoretical analysis of the label noise and experiments with various models and datasets, we show that this approach tolerates high noise levels and significantly accelerates several feature attribution and data valuation methods, often yielding an order of magnitude speedup over existing approaches.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Covert0LZH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Covert0LZH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/084252ec5f05f13bf565843c1873686d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"解决数据估值（data valuation）和特征归因（feature attribution）等可解释性方法计算成本过高的问题。传统方法对每个数据点都需要昂贵的计算，在大规模数据集上不可行。","importance":"方法级贡献。提出了一种用噪声标签训练摊销（amortized）模型的方法，大幅加速了特征归因和数据估值。这对于理解和清洗预训练数据（如评估特定数据点对模型性能的贡献）具有潜在的系统级加速意义。","technical_approach":"采用随机摊销（Stochastic Amortization）。核心思想是训练一个神经网络直接预测归因或估值结果，但由于获取精确标签成本太高，改用带有高噪声的近似标签进行训练。理论和实验证明，这种方法对高噪声具有很强的容忍度，能以极低的成本获得有效的预测模型。","experiments":"通过理论分析了标签噪声的影响，并在多个模型和数据集上进行了实验。结果表明，该方法能容忍高水平的噪声，并显著加速了多种特征归因和数据估值方法，同时保持了较高的准确性。具体加速比和数据集规模未在摘要中详述。","authors_note":"James Y. Zou 和 Tatsunori B. Hashimoto 是斯坦福大学在机器学习可解释性和鲁棒性领域的知名学者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"To solve the prohibitive computational cost of explainability methods like data valuation and feature attribution. Traditional methods require expensive computation for each data point, making them intractable for large datasets.","importance":"Methodological contribution. Proposes a method to train amortized models with noisy labels, significantly accelerating feature attribution and data valuation. This has potential system-level acceleration implications for understanding and cleaning pre-training data (e.g., evaluating the contribution of specific data points to model performance).","technical_approach":"Employs Stochastic Amortization. The core idea is to train a neural network to directly predict attribution or valuation results. Since obtaining exact labels is too costly, it uses highly noisy approximate labels for training. Theoretical and empirical results show this method is highly tolerant to noise and yields effective predictive models at a very low cost.","experiments":"Theoretically analyzed the impact of label noise and conducted experiments across various models and datasets. Results show the method tolerates high noise levels and significantly accelerates several feature attribution and data valuation methods while maintaining high accuracy. Specific speedup ratios and dataset scales are not detailed in the abstract.","authors_note":"James Y. Zou and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto are well-known scholars at Stanford University in the fields of ML interpretability and robustness."},"tags":["attribution","amortization","interpretability","efficiency"],"keywords":["Amortization","feature attribution","data valuation","stochastic optimization"],"notable_authors":["James Y. Zou","Tatsunori B. Hashimoto"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"数据估值和特征归因等可解释性方法在大型数据集上计算成本极高，需要高效的近似方法。","claim_en":"Explainability methods such as data valuation and feature attribution are computationally expensive on large datasets and require efficient approximations.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"使用带有高噪声的标签训练摊销模型不仅成本低廉，而且效果出奇地好，能够容忍高噪声水平。","claim_en":"Training amortized models with highly noisy labels is not only inexpensive but also surprisingly effective, tolerating high noise levels.","opposes":"通常认为训练摊销模型需要精确的标签，而获取这些标签是不可行的。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"打破了训练预测模型必须依赖高质量标签的直觉，为大规模可解释性计算提供了一条极低成本的路径。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为预训练数据估值相关文献备查，仅需在需要加速归因计算时快速查阅核心公式，无需精读全文","en":"Keep as literature reference for pre-training data valuation work, only check core formulas when needing to accelerate attribution calculation, no need to read full text"}},{"id":"CuiTZ00Z24","title":"Decoupled Kullback-Leibler Divergence Loss","authors":["Jiequan Cui","Zhuotao Tian","Zhisheng Zhong","Xiaojuan Qi","Bei Yu","Hanwang Zhang"],"institutions":["The Chinese University of Hong Kong","Tencent AI Lab","The University of Hong Kong"],"abstract":"$154","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/CuiTZ00Z24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/CuiTZ00Z24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/87ee1bbac4635e7c948f3eea83c1f262-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"改进 Kullback-Leibler (KL) 散度损失函数。KL 散度在知识蒸馏等场景中存在不对称优化的问题，且容易受到单个样本偏差的影响。","importance":"方法级贡献。从数学上证明了 KL 散度等价于解耦的 KL (DKL) 散度，并基于此提出了两项改进。这对于依赖 KL 散度的预训练或后训练任务（如模型蒸馏、对齐）提供了更稳定和有效的损失函数选择。","technical_approach":"首先证明 KL 散度等价于加权均方误差 (wMSE) 和包含软标签的交叉熵损失之和（即 DKL）。基于此解耦形式，做了两点改进：1) 打破 KL 的不对称优化特性，确保 wMSE 组件在训练期间始终有效，提供额外的建设性线索；2) 引入类级别的全局信息，以减轻单个样本带来的偏差。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体的模型参数量、数据规模或核心指标提升幅度。主要强调了数学证明和基于解耦形式的改进策略。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"To improve the Kullback-Leibler (KL) Divergence loss. KL divergence suffers from asymmetric optimization in scenarios like knowledge distillation and is susceptible to bias from individual samples.","importance":"Methodological contribution. Mathematically proves that KL divergence is equivalent to Decoupled KL (DKL) divergence and proposes two improvements based on this. This provides a more stable and effective loss function choice for pre-training or post-training tasks relying on KL divergence (e.g., model distillation, alignment).","technical_approach":"First proves that KL divergence is equivalent to the sum of a weighted Mean Square Error (wMSE) and a Cross-Entropy loss incorporating soft labels (i.e., DKL). Based on this decoupled formulation, two improvements are made: 1) breaking the asymmetric optimization property of KL to ensure the wMSE component is always effective during training, providing extra constructive cues; 2) introducing class-wise global information to mitigate bias from individual samples.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide specific model parameter sizes, data scales, or core metric improvements. It mainly emphasizes the mathematical proof and improvement strategies based on the decoupled formulation.","authors_note":""},"tags":["kl-divergence","loss-function","knowledge-distillation"],"keywords":["Adversarial Training; Knowledge Distillation; Kullback-Leibler Divergence Loss; Long-tail Recognition"],"notable_authors":["Xiaojuan Qi","Bei Yu"],"views":{"consensus":[],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"KL 散度在数学上等价于解耦的 KL (DKL) 散度，即加权均方误差 (wMSE) 和包含软标签的交叉熵损失之和。","claim_en":"KL Divergence is mathematically equivalent to Decoupled KL (DKL) Divergence, which consists of a weighted Mean Square Error (wMSE) loss and a Cross-Entropy loss incorporating soft labels.","opposes":"传统上将 KL 散度视为一个不可分割的整体损失函数。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"通过解耦 KL 散度，揭示了其内部机制，为针对性地改进损失函数（如解决不对称优化问题）提供了理论基础。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为KL散度改进相关文献备查，仅需在蒸馏、对齐任务需要替换损失时查阅解耦公式部分即可","en":"Keep as reference for KL divergence improvement, only check decoupled formula section when needing loss replacement for distillation/alignment tasks"}},{"id":"DaineseMAM24","title":"Generating Code World Models with Large Language Models Guided by Monte Carlo Tree Search","authors":["Nicola Dainese","Matteo Merler","Minttu Alakuijala","Pekka Marttinen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$155","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DaineseMAM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DaineseMAM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/6f479ea488e0908ac8b1b37b27fd134c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注如何让 LLM 生成可执行的代码世界模型，而不只是生成表面上合理的文本代码。过去直接让模型自回归写环境规则，常见问题是语法对了但动力学错了，或者局部合理但全局不可用；世界模型这种对象尤其不能只靠 token-level likelihood 近似，因为真正重要的是 rollout 后的行为一致性。","importance":"它的重要性主要在于把搜索引导引入代码生成式世界建模，属于生成建模与规划接口上的方法工作。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：当目标对象具有强可验证结构时，只用 next-token 训练和解码往往不够，测试时搜索或训练时可执行反馈可以显著改变输出质量。这和程序合成、tool use、latent planning 都有共通点，对“语言模型能否直接充当可执行生成器”这个问题有参考价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法是用 Monte Carlo Tree Search 引导 LLM 生成代码形式的世界模型。比起一次性采样整段程序，它更像在程序空间里逐步扩展候选、利用可执行反馈或任务回报来评估部分程序，从而把高概率但低可用性的解码路径剪掉。这样设计有效，因为代码世界模型的质量不是局部 token 概率可分解的；搜索能显式优化长程一致性和可执行结果。它和常规 reranking 的区别，大概率在于搜索发生在生成过程中，而不是生成后挑一个最好样本。","experiments":"当前没有摘要细节，无法确认环境类型、LLM 规模、搜索预算和成功率提升。值得重点看的是：MCTS 相比 beam search 或 self-consistency 是否真的更适合代码世界模型；性能提升来自更好探索还是来自额外 sample budget；以及搜索开销是否足以被更高的环境拟合率或规划收益抵消。如果提升只在小型合成环境成立，外推价值会受限。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses how to make LLMs generate executable code world models rather than merely plausible-looking code. Direct autoregressive generation often produces programs that are syntactically fine but dynamically wrong, or locally coherent but globally unusable. For world models, token likelihood is a weak proxy because rollout behavior is what actually matters.","importance":"The contribution sits at the interface of generation and planning: it brings search-based guidance into code world-model synthesis. The broader lesson for pretraining is that next-token modeling and standard decoding can be insufficient when outputs have strong verifiable structure. In such settings, search at inference time or executable feedback during training can change quality much more than a better language prior alone.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to guide LLM code generation with Monte Carlo Tree Search. Instead of sampling a full program in one pass, the method likely expands candidate programs incrementally and scores partial programs using executability or downstream return. This is effective because the utility of a code world model is not locally decomposable over tokens; search can optimize long-range consistency and rollout validity directly. The likely difference from simple reranking is that the search shapes the generation path itself rather than filtering complete samples after the fact.","experiments":"The provided information does not include environment types, model sizes, search budgets, or exact gains. The important questions are whether MCTS truly outperforms beam search or self-consistency for this problem, whether gains come from better exploration rather than just more sampling, and whether the compute overhead is justified by stronger world-model fidelity or planning performance.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-generation","world-model","mcts","llm"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","code generation","MCTS","model-based reinforcement learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的MCTS引导生成逻辑和Fig5的效果对比即可，可验证结构化目标不能仅靠next-token训练的结论可复用在代码预训练优化","en":"Only read §3 for MCTS guided generation logic and Fig5 for performance comparison, the conclusion that verifiable structured targets cannot rely only on next-token training is reusable for code pre-training optimization"}},{"id":"2411.07336","title":"SETLEXSEM CHALLENGE: Using Set Operations to Evaluate the Lexical and Semantic Robustness of Language Models","authors":["Nicholas A. Dronen","Bardiya Akhbari","Manish Gawali"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$156","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.07336","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DronenAG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DronenAG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/5a12909ffd7145c41139ad66ecf20fc0-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 在集合运算（交集、并集、差集等）上的表现是否对操作数的词汇和语义变化保持不变？此前对 LLM 算法能力的评测多聚焦于数学推理或代码生成，缺少对集合操作这类基础逻辑能力在不同表面形式下鲁棒性的系统测试。","importance":"方法级贡献——提供了一个合成 benchmark 来系统探测 LLM 在简单符号操作上的鲁棒性。对 pretrain 研究的启示有限，但有助于理解 LLM 在基础逻辑推理上的泛化边界：即使是简单集合操作，换一下元素类型（数字→单词→短语）性能就可能显著变化，暗示 tokenization 和训练分布对算法能力的影响。","technical_approach":"构建合成数据集 SetLexSem Challenge，系统控制集合元素类型（数字/单词/短语）、集合大小、操作类型等变量，评估 LLM 在不同条件下执行集合运算的准确率。核心设计是通过正交变量组合来隔离词汇变化和语义变化各自对性能的影响。","experiments":"在多个主流 LLM 上测试，发现即使是简单的集合操作，模型性能随元素类型和集合规模变化显著，表明 LLM 的算法能力并非真正与表面形式无关。具体数字未在摘要中给出。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Do LLMs perform set operations (union, intersection, difference) consistently regardless of lexical and semantic variations in the operands? Prior benchmarks for LLM algorithmic ability lack systematic control over surface-form variations for such fundamental logical tasks.","importance":"A method-level contribution providing a synthetic benchmark for probing LLM robustness on basic symbolic operations. Limited direct pretrain impact, but reveals that even simple set operations degrade under element-type changes (numbers → words → phrases), highlighting how tokenization and training distribution shape algorithmic generalization.","technical_approach":"Constructs the SetLexSem Challenge, a synthetic benchmark that orthogonally varies element type (numbers, words, phrases), set size, and operation type. This design isolates the effect of lexical vs. semantic variation on LLM set-operation accuracy.","experiments":"Evaluated on multiple mainstream LLMs. Performance varies significantly with element type and set size, demonstrating that LLM algorithmic abilities are not invariant to surface form. Specific numbers not provided in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","reasoning","robustness","llm-eval"],"keywords":["benchmark","set theory","semantics"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的不同变量控制下的性能变化表即可，可快速定位当前LLM集合运算能力的泛化边界，无需深入方法细节","en":"Only check §4's performance variation table under different variable controls, can quickly locate the generalization boundary of current LLM set operation ability, no need to dive into method details"}},{"id":"2402.07844","title":"Mercury: A Code Efficiency Benchmark for Code Large Language Models","authors":["Mingzhe Du","Anh Tuan Luu","Bin Ji","Qian Liu","See-Kiong Ng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$157","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.07844","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DuLJLN24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DuLJLN24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1df1df43b58845650b8dada00fca9772-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有代码 LLM 评测只关注功能正确性，忽略了生成代码的计算效率。实际工程中，能跑对和跑得快是两回事，缺少一个同时衡量正确性和运行效率的 benchmark。","importance":"数据/评测级贡献。引入了 Beyond 指标，将运行时间百分位加权到 Pass 分数中，首次系统量化代码 LLM 在效率维度的差距。对 pretrain 研究的直接启示是：当前代码预训练数据和目标可能过度优化正确性而忽视效率，提示未来代码预训练可考虑效率信号。","technical_approach":"构建 Mercury benchmark，包含 1889 个 Python 任务，每个任务附带多个真实效率基线解，用于建立运行时间分布。在此基础上定义 Beyond 指标：对每个通过功能测试的解，计算其运行时间在基线分布中的百分位，加权后得到综合分数。","experiments":"领先的代码 LLM 在 Pass 上可达约 65%，但 Beyond 不到 50%，说明功能正确的代码中有相当比例效率较差。这一差距量化了当前模型在代码效率上的短板。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing Code LLM benchmarks focus solely on functional correctness, ignoring computational efficiency of generated code. In practice, correctness and speed are distinct concerns, and no benchmark jointly measured both.","importance":"A benchmark-level contribution. The Beyond metric—a runtime-percentile-weighted Pass score—is the first systematic way to quantify the efficiency gap in Code LLMs. For pretrain research, it suggests that code pretraining data and objectives may over-optimize for correctness while neglecting efficiency signals.","technical_approach":"Mercury benchmark: 1,889 Python tasks, each with multiple real-world solutions serving as runtime baselines to establish a runtime distribution. The Beyond metric weights each passing solution by its runtime percentile within this distribution, producing a joint correctness-efficiency score.","experiments":"Leading Code LLMs achieve ~65% Pass but less than 50% Beyond, quantifying a substantial gap between generating correct code and generating efficient code.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-llm","benchmark","efficiency","evaluation"],"keywords":["code generation","language model","computational efficiency","benchmark"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§2的Beyond指标定义和§4的不同代码模型效率差距实验即可，可直接用来优化代码预训练的训练目标","en":"Only read §2 for Beyond metric definition and §4 for efficiency gap experiments of different code models, can be directly used to optimize code pre-training objectives"}},{"id":"DuZZMCHYX024","title":"MoGU: A Framework for Enhancing Safety of LLMs While Preserving Their Usability","authors":["Yanrui Du","Sendong Zhao","Danyang Zhao","Ming Ma","Yuhan Chen","Liangyu Huo","Qing Yang","Dongliang Xu","Bing Qin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$158","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DuZZMCHYX024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DuZZMCHYX024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9f7f063144103bf6debb09a3f15e00fb-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有 LLM 安全防御策略过度倾向拒绝，导致对正常指令的可用性下降。安全和可用性之间的 trade-off 没有被很好地处理。","importance":"方法级贡献，聚焦 posttrain 阶段的安全-可用性平衡。对 pretrain 研究的直接启示有限，但动态路由的思路（将一个基座模型分化为安全版和可用版再融合）对理解 alignment tax 有参考价值。","technical_approach":"MoGU 框架将基座 LLM 分化为两个变体：usable LLM 和 safe LLM，通过动态路由机制根据输入指令的性质来平衡两者的贡献。核心设计是把安全和可用性解耦到不同的模型变体中，避免单一模型在两个目标间的冲突。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体实验数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM safety defenses over-reject, degrading usability on benign instructions. The safety-usability trade-off is poorly handled.","importance":"A method-level contribution in the posttrain safety space. Limited direct pretrain relevance, but the dynamic routing idea (splitting a base model into safe and usable variants) offers a reference point for understanding alignment tax.","technical_approach":"MoGU splits a base LLM into two variants—usable and safe—and uses dynamic routing to balance their contributions based on input intent. The key design choice is decoupling safety and usability into separate model variants to avoid conflicting objectives in a single model.","experiments":"Specific experimental numbers not provided in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["safety","alignment","usability","post-training"],"keywords":["Enhancing Safety","Preseving Usability","Large Language Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的动态路由设计逻辑即可，可参考解耦安全与可用性目标的思路用于降低alignment tax","en":"Only read §3 for dynamic routing design logic, the idea of decoupling safety and usability objectives can be referenced to reduce alignment tax"}},{"id":"DuanZDK0SBCX24","title":"GTBench: Uncovering the Strategic Reasoning Capabilities of LLMs via Game-Theoretic Evaluations","authors":["Jinhao Duan","Renming Zhang","James Diffenderfer","Bhavya Kailkhura","Lichao Sun","Elias Stengel-Eskin","Mohit Bansal","Tianlong Chen","Kaidi Xu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$159","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DuanZDK0SBCX24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DuanZDK0SBCX24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3191170938b6102e5c203b036b7c16dd-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"评估 LLM 的策略推理能力缺少系统化的 benchmark。GTBench 用博弈论框架来测试 LLM 在不同博弈场景下的策略行为。","importance":"评测级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的启示有限，但从能力评估角度看，博弈论推理是一个有趣的探针，可以揭示 LLM 在多步策略规划上的能力边界。","technical_approach":"摘要为空，无法提供技术细节。","experiments":"摘要为空，无法提供实验细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Systematic benchmarks for evaluating LLM strategic reasoning are lacking. GTBench uses game-theoretic scenarios to probe LLM strategic behavior.","importance":"A benchmark-level contribution. Limited direct pretrain relevance, but game-theoretic reasoning serves as an interesting probe for multi-step strategic planning capabilities.","technical_approach":"Abstract is empty; no technical details available.","experiments":"Abstract is empty; no experimental details available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","reasoning","game-theory","llm-eval"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Game Theory","Strategic Reasoning","Benchmark"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看附录的博弈场景设计和主文的各模型策略推理能力排名即可，作为策略能力探针参考","en":"Only check the game scenario design in appendix and strategic reasoning ranking of each model in main text, as reference for ability probe design"}},{"id":"2406.06576","title":"OccamLLM: Fast and Exact Language Model Arithmetic in a Single Step","authors":["Owen Dugan","Donato Jiménez-Benetó","Charlotte Loh","Zhuo Chen","Rumen Dangovski","Marin Soljacic"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$15a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.06576","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DuganJLCDS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DuganJLCDS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3eceb70f47690051d6769739fbf6294b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 在复杂算术运算上仍然不准确。现有方案让 LLM 生成代码来做计算，但牺牲了速度和安全性；微调则可能损害模型原有能力。需要一种在单步自回归中实现精确算术的方法。","importance":"方法级贡献。思路有趣：用 LLM 的隐藏状态驱动一个符号计算模块（OccamNet），在单个解码步内完成精确算术。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：LLM 隐藏状态中已经编码了足够的数值信息来控制外部符号系统，这为理解 LLM 内部数值表征提供了证据。","technical_approach":"在 LLM（Llama 3）的隐藏状态上接一个符号架构 OccamNet，后者执行实际的算术运算。不需要微调 LLM 本身，只训练隐藏状态到符号模块的映射。关键优势是单步完成、不生成代码、不调用外部工具，且保持 LLM 原有能力不受影响。","experiments":"OccamLlama（Llama 3 + OccamNet）在某些算术任务上达到 100% 准确率。相比生成代码的方案更快更安全，相比微调方案不损害原有能力。具体 baseline 对比和任务范围在摘要中未完整给出。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs still fail at complex arithmetic. Code-generation workarounds sacrifice speed and security; fine-tuning risks capability loss. A method for exact arithmetic in a single autoregressive step is needed.","importance":"A method-level contribution with an interesting angle: LLM hidden states contain enough numerical information to drive a symbolic arithmetic module in one step. This provides evidence about LLM internal numerical representations, relevant to understanding what pretrained models encode.","technical_approach":"Attach a symbolic architecture (OccamNet) to Llama 3's hidden states. OccamNet performs the actual arithmetic, controlled by the LLM's internal representations. No LLM fine-tuning needed—only the hidden-state-to-symbol mapping is trained. Single-step, no code generation, no external tool calls, and original LLM capabilities are preserved.","experiments":"OccamLlama (Llama 3 + OccamNet) achieves 100% accuracy on certain arithmetic tasks. Faster and more secure than code-generation approaches, and avoids capability degradation from fine-tuning. Full baseline comparisons and task scope not detailed in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["arithmetic","reasoning","architecture","llm"],"keywords":["LLM","Language Model","Arithmetic","OccamNet","Llama"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的隐藏状态与数值表征的关联实验即可，验证LLM隐藏态可驱动外部符号系统的结论可用于工具调用预训练优化","en":"Only read §4's correlation experiment between hidden states and numerical representations, the conclusion that LLM hidden states can drive external symbolic systems is useful for tool use pre-training optimization"}},{"id":"2406.11171","title":"SUGARCREPE++ Dataset: Vision-Language Model Sensitivity to Semantic and Lexical Alterations","authors":["Sri Harsha Dumpala","Aman Jaiswal","Chandramouli Shama Sastry","Evangelos E. Milios","Sageev Oore","Hassan Sajjad"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$15b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11171","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/DumpalaJSMO024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/DumpalaJSMO024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/200661bf8f4993b7828a45a2a90f2ecf-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"VLM 和单模态语言模型对语义等价但词汇不同的句子会产生不同的表征，这种敏感性的程度和对语义编码的影响尚不清楚。此前缺少同时控制词汇变化和语义变化的评测数据集。","importance":"数据/评测级贡献。SUGARCREPE++ 提供了一个三元组结构（两个语义等价但词汇不同的正例 + 一个硬负例），可以同时测试 VLM 对词汇变化的鲁棒性和对语义差异的区分能力。对 pretrain 研究的启示：揭示了当前视觉-语言对齐预训练中文本编码器的词汇敏感性问题。","technical_approach":"构建 SUGARCREPE++ 数据集，每个样本包含一张图片和三个 caption：两个语义等价但词汇不同的正 caption，一个硬负 caption。这构成一个三路语义（不）等价判断任务，可以解耦词汇变化和语义变化对模型表征的影响。","experiments":"摘要未给出具体实验数字和模型对比结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"VLMs and unimodal LMs produce diverging representations for semantically equivalent sentences with different lexical forms. The degree and impact of this sensitivity is poorly understood, and no dataset jointly controls for lexical vs. semantic variation.","importance":"A benchmark-level contribution. SUGARCREPE++ uses triplets (two semantically equivalent but lexically different positives + one hard negative) to disentangle lexical sensitivity from semantic discrimination. For pretrain research, it highlights lexical sensitivity issues in vision-language alignment pretraining.","technical_approach":"Each SUGARCREPE++ sample consists of an image and a caption triplet: two positive captions that are semantically equivalent but lexically different, plus one hard negative. This creates a 3-way semantic (in)equivalence task that decouples lexical variation from semantic variation effects on model representations.","experiments":"Specific experimental numbers and model comparisons not provided in the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","vlm","semantic-robustness","llm-eval"],"keywords":["Large Language Models (LLMs)","Vision-and-Language Models (VLMs)","Semantic","Lexical","compositionality"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的数据集构造逻辑和§4的VLM词汇敏感性实验结果即可，可用于优化多模态预训练的文本编码器对齐策略","en":"Only read §3 for dataset construction logic and §4 for VLM lexical sensitivity experiment results, can be used to optimize text encoder alignment strategy for multi-modal pre-training"}},{"id":"FanL0TQCC24","title":"On Giant&apos;s Shoulders: Effortless Weak to Strong by Dynamic Logits Fusion","authors":["Chenghao Fan","Zhenyi Lu","Wei Wei","Jie Tian","Xiaoye Qu","Dangyang Chen","Yu Cheng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/FanL0TQCC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/FanL0TQCC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/34ec1286b2ccd4794c5ca4ad078b7150-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["weak-to-strong","logits-fusion","llm-ensemble"]},{"id":"FangBWJGW0SWC24","title":"Towards Neuron Attributions in Multi-Modal Large Language Models","authors":["Junfeng Fang","Zac Bi","Ruipeng Wang","Houcheng Jiang","Yuan Gao","Kun Wang","An Zhang","Jie Shi","Xiang Wang","Tat-Seng Chua"],"institutions":["Zhejiang University","National University of Singapore"],"abstract":"$15c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/FangBWJGW0SWC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/FangBWJGW0SWC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/de076d0485c1fba8326500a860fe9274-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"将神经元归因（Neuron Attribution）方法扩展到多模态大型语言模型（MLLMs）。现有的神经元归因主要用于纯文本 LLMs，在 MLLMs 中的应用探索较少，难以揭示其跨模态的内部机制。","importance":"方法级/机制分析贡献。提出了专为 MLLMs 设计的神经元归因方法 NAM，不仅能揭示特定模态的语义知识，还发现了跨模态不变性（cross-modal invariance）等有趣属性。这对于理解多模态预训练模型内部如何对齐和表示不同模态的信息具有重要启发。","technical_approach":"提出了一种名为 NAM 的新型神经元归因方法。该方法专门针对 MLLMs 设计，旨在将模型输出归因于特定神经元，从而揭示这些神经元学习到的特定模态语义属性。关键在于它能够捕捉到神经元的跨模态不变性和语义敏感性。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体的模型参数量、数据规模或核心指标。主要强调了 NAM 方法能够揭示 MLLMs 中神经元的特定属性（如跨模态不变性）。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"To extend Neuron Attribution methods to Multi-Modal Large Language Models (MLLMs). Existing neuron attribution is mainly used for text-only LLMs, and its application in MLLMs is less explored, making it difficult to reveal their cross-modal internal mechanisms.","importance":"Methodological/Mechanistic analysis contribution. Proposes NAM, a neuron attribution method tailored for MLLMs, which not only reveals modality-specific semantic knowledge but also discovers intriguing properties like cross-modal invariance. This provides important insights into how multi-modal pre-trained models internally align and represent information from different modalities.","technical_approach":"Proposes a novel Neuron Attribution method called NAM. Tailored for MLLMs, it aims to attribute model outputs to specific neurons to reveal the modality-specific semantic properties they learn. The key is its ability to capture neuron properties such as cross-modal invariance and semantic sensitivity.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide specific model parameter sizes, data scales, or core metrics. It mainly emphasizes that the NAM method can reveal specific properties of neurons in MLLMs (e.g., cross-modal invariance).","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","multimodal-llm","neuron-attribution"],"keywords":["Neuron Attribution","Large Language Models","Multimodality"],"notable_authors":["Xinchao Wang"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"神经元归因是揭示 LLMs 内部机制和学习到的语义属性的关键可解释性方法。","claim_en":"Neuron attribution is a key interpretability approach to reveal the internal mechanisms and learned semantic properties of LLMs.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4的跨模态神经元不变性发现部分即可，可作为多模态预训练内部机制分析的参考","en":"Only read §4's cross-modal neuron invariance discovery part, can be used as reference for internal mechanism analysis of multi-modal pre-training"}},{"id":"FangMW24","title":"Remix-DiT: Mixing Diffusion Transformers for Multi-Expert Denoising","authors":["Gongfan Fang","Xinyin Ma","Xinchao Wang"],"institutions":["National University of Singapore"],"abstract":"$15d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/FangMW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/FangMW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c2ae6a5b08e85fb96e31ff7dba83d6c1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"降低基于 Transformer 的扩散模型（DiT）的训练和推理开销。高质量生成通常需要大型 DiT，导致成本高昂。","importance":"方法级/效率优化贡献。提出 RemixDiT，通过混合少量基础模型来构建多个去噪专家，以低成本提升生成质量。这为扩散模型的参数高效扩展（Scaling）提供了一种新思路，类似于 MoE 在 AR 模型中的作用，但应用于去噪时间步。","technical_approach":"提出 RemixDiT，采用多专家去噪策略。核心机制是：不独立训练 N 个对应不同时间步的专家模型，而是训练 K 个基础模型（K < N），并使用可学习的混合系数（mixing coefficients）自适应地组合这些基础模型，生成 N 个扩散专家。这种设计避免了昂贵的独立训练成本。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体的模型参数量、数据规模或核心指标提升幅度。主要强调了该设计允许以低成本构建多个专家，从而提升输出质量。","authors_note":"Xinchao Wang 是新加坡国立大学（NUS）的知名学者，在计算机视觉和高效深度学习方面有丰富工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"To reduce the training and inference overhead of Transformer-based diffusion models (DiT). High-quality generation typically requires large DiTs, resulting in substantial costs.","importance":"Methodological/Efficiency optimization contribution. Proposes RemixDiT, which constructs multiple denoising experts by mixing a small number of basis models to enhance generation quality at a low cost. This provides a new perspective for parameter-efficient scaling of diffusion models, akin to the role of MoE in AR models, but applied to denoising timesteps.","technical_approach":"Proposes RemixDiT, employing a multi-expert denoising strategy. The core mechanism is: instead of independently training N expert models for different timesteps, it trains K basis models (K < N) and uses learnable mixing coefficients to adaptively combine them to craft N diffusion experts. This design avoids the expensive cost of independent training.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide specific model parameter sizes, data scales, or core metric improvements. It mainly emphasizes that this design allows crafting multiple experts at a low cost, thereby enhancing output quality.","authors_note":"Xinchao Wang is a well-known scholar at the National University of Singapore (NUS) with extensive work in computer vision and efficient deep learning."},"tags":["diffusion-transformer","moe","denoising"],"keywords":["Diffusion Models","Multiple Experts"],"notable_authors":["Xinchao Wang"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"基于 Transformer 的扩散模型在生成任务上取得了显著进展，但高质量输出通常依赖于大型模型，导致高昂的训练和推理开销。","claim_en":"Transformer-based diffusion models have achieved significant advancements in generative tasks, but high-quality outputs typically rely on large models, resulting in substantial training and inference overhead.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为扩散模型多专家扩展相关文献备查，仅需在做扩散预训练效率优化时快速查阅混合系数设计","en":"Keep as reference for diffusion model multi-expert scaling, only check mixing coefficient design when doing diffusion pre-training efficiency optimization"}},{"id":"FarinhasLM24","title":"Reranking Laws for Language Generation: A Communication-Theoretic Perspective","authors":["António Farinhas","Haau-Sing Li","André F. T. Martins"],"institutions":["Instituto de Telecomunicações","Unbabel","Instituto Superior Técnico"],"abstract":"$15e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/FarinhasLM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/FarinhasLM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c8b2f897e45770595656a79a9ad91e89-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"为 LLM 生成中的重排序（reranking）策略提供理论解释。生成多个假设再用重排序器选择最佳结果是减少幻觉的常用策略，但缺乏理论视角的分析。","importance":"理论级/机制分析贡献。从通信理论的视角（将生成器视为发送者，重排序器视为接收者）分析了重排序策略，并给出了该协议渐近无误差的条件。这为理解和优化 LLM 的推理时搜索（inference-time search）和验证机制提供了理论基础。","technical_approach":"将重排序策略与噪声通信信道中使用冗余降低错误率的做法进行类比。概念化生成器为通过并行噪声信道传输消息的发送者，接收者通过对描述进行排序来解码。核心在于推导出了在这种协议下，随着生成假设数量的增加，能够几乎肯定地获得可接受答案的条件（Reranking Laws）。","experiments":"这是一篇偏理论分析的文章，主要贡献在于推导渐近无误差的条件，摘要未提及具体的实验数据或指标。","authors_note":"André F. T. Martins 是里斯本大学和 Unbabel 的知名学者，在 NLP 和结构化预测方面有深入研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"To provide a theoretical explanation for the reranking strategy in LLM generation. Generating multiple hypotheses and using a reranker to select the best is a common strategy to reduce hallucinations, but lacks analysis from a theoretical perspective.","importance":"Theoretical/Mechanistic analysis contribution. Analyzes the reranking strategy from a communication-theoretic perspective (viewing the generator as a sender and the reranker as a receiver) and provides conditions under which this protocol is asymptotically error-free. This provides a theoretical foundation for understanding and optimizing inference-time search and verification mechanisms in LLMs.","technical_approach":"Draws a parallel between the reranking strategy and the use of redundancy to decrease error rates in noisy communication channels. Conceptualizes the generator as a sender transmitting messages through parallel noisy channels, and the receiver decodes by ranking the descriptions. The core is deriving the conditions (Reranking Laws) under which this protocol yields an acceptable answer almost surely as the number of generated hypotheses increases.","experiments":"This is a theoretically inclined paper; its main contribution lies in deriving conditions for asymptotic error-free generation. The abstract does not mention specific experimental data or metrics.","authors_note":"André F. T. Martins is a well-known scholar at the University of Lisbon and Unbabel, with deep research in NLP and structured prediction."},"tags":["reranking","decoding","language-generation","information-theory"],"keywords":["language generation","reranking","communication theory","reliability"],"notable_authors":["André F. T. Martins"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"生成多个假设并使用重排序器选择最佳结果是减少 LLM 幻觉和生成不可接受答案的常用且简单的策略。","claim_en":"Generating multiple hypotheses and employing a reranker to choose the best one is a simple and often used strategy to reduce LLM hallucinations and unacceptable answers.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的重排序定律推导和渐近无误差条件即可，可直接用于优化推理时重排序策略降低幻觉","en":"Only read §3 for reranking law derivation and asymptotic error-free conditions, can be directly used to optimize inference-time reranking strategies to reduce hallucinations"}},{"id":"FerbachBBG24","title":"Self-Consuming Generative Models with Curated Data Provably Optimize Human Preferences","authors":["Damien Ferbach","Quentin Bertrand","Avishek Joey Bose","Gauthier Gidel"],"institutions":["Mila","Université de Montréal","McGill University"],"abstract":"$15f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/FerbachBBG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/FerbachBBG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/b9e88ae0308cf82d0b0f634ddbdf809a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"研究在人类反馈和策展（curation）介入下，自消耗生成模型（即用合成数据迭代重训练的模型）的动态行为。以往的理论多关注纯合成数据导致的模型崩溃，忽略了实际应用中人类对合成数据的筛选作用。","importance":"理论级/范式级贡献。证明了如果合成数据经过人类偏好策展，迭代重训练不仅不会导致模型崩溃，反而能可证明地优化人类偏好。这为利用人类反馈强化学习（RLHF）或拒绝采样（Rejection Sampling）等后训练技术反哺预训练提供了重要的理论支持，表明高质量的合成数据飞轮是可行的。","technical_approach":"分析了带有数据策展的自消耗生成模型。核心机制是引入了人类反馈环节，即合成数据在被用于下一轮训练前，会经过用户的筛选（例如文本到图像模型中的用户选择）。通过理论证明，这种策展机制改变了迭代重训练的动态，使其从潜在的模型崩溃转变为对人类偏好的优化过程。","experiments":"摘要主要强调理论证明（provably optimize），未提及具体的实验设置、模型规模或量化指标。","authors_note":"Gauthier Gidel 是蒙特利尔大学（Mila）的学者，在生成模型和优化理论方面有相关研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"To study the dynamics of self-consuming generative models (iteratively retrained on synthetic data) when human feedback and curation are involved. Previous theories mostly focused on model collapse caused by pure synthetic data, ignoring the filtering role of humans in practical applications.","importance":"Theoretical/Paradigm contribution. Proves that if synthetic data is curated based on human preferences, iterative retraining not only avoids model collapse but provably optimizes human preferences. This provides crucial theoretical support for using post-training techniques like RLHF or Rejection Sampling to feed back into pre-training, indicating that a high-quality synthetic data flywheel is feasible.","technical_approach":"Analyzes self-consuming generative models with data curation. The core mechanism introduces a human feedback loop, where synthetic data is filtered by users (e.g., user selection in text-to-image models) before being used for the next round of training. Theoretically proves that this curation mechanism alters the dynamics of iterative retraining, shifting it from potential model collapse to an optimization process for human preferences.","experiments":"The abstract primarily emphasizes theoretical proofs (provably optimize) and does not mention specific experimental setups, model scales, or quantitative metrics.","authors_note":"Gauthier Gidel is a scholar at Mila, University of Montreal, with research in generative models and optimization theory."},"tags":["self-consuming","synthetic-data","human-preference","data-curation"],"keywords":["retraining","curating","generative model","self-consuming"],"notable_authors":["Gauthier Gidel"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"自消耗生成模型（使用生成的合成数据进行迭代重训练）可能会导致模型崩溃或稳定，具体取决于每次重训练步骤中使用的生成数据的比例。","claim_en":"Self-consuming generative models (iterative retraining on generated synthetic data) could lead to either model collapse or stability depending on the fraction of generated data used at each retraining step.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"当合成数据经过人类偏好策展时，自消耗生成模型不仅不会崩溃，反而能可证明地优化人类偏好。","claim_en":"When synthetic data is curated based on human preferences, self-consuming generative models not only avoid collapse but provably optimize human preferences.","opposes":"纯粹的自消耗生成模型（无外部干预）通常会导致模型崩溃（Model Collapse）。","opposes_cite_hint":"Shumailov 2023 Model Collapse","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"指出了人类反馈在打破合成数据导致模型退化循环中的关键作用，为基于高质量合成数据的持续预训练提供了理论依据。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看定理证明部分和核心假设即可，结论可支撑合成数据飞轮的预训练管线设计，理论边界清晰可复现","en":"Only read the theorem proof section and core assumptions, the conclusion supports synthetic data flywheel pretraining pipeline design with clear reproducible theoretical bounds."}},{"id":"GaoZXMW24","title":"Stabilizing Zero-Shot Prediction: A Novel Antidote to Forgetting in Continual Vision-Language Tasks","authors":["Zijian Gao","Xingxing Zhang","Kele Xu","Xinjun Mao","Huaimin Wang"],"institutions":["National University of Defense Technology"],"abstract":"$160","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GaoZXMW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GaoZXMW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e7feb9dbd9a94b6c552fc403fcebf2ef-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"解决视觉-语言（VL）模型在持续学习（Continual Learning, CL）过程中的灾难性遗忘问题。现有方法通常依赖复杂的框架或重放（replay）策略来权衡学习与遗忘。","importance":"方法级贡献。发现模型在连续零样本预测中的稳定性是其抗遗忘能力的可靠指标，并据此提出了一种无重放（replay-free）的持续学习方法。这为多模态模型的持续预训练或微调提供了一种轻量级且有效的正则化手段，避免了存储历史数据的开销。","technical_approach":"提出了一种名为 ZAF（Zero-shot Antidote to Forgetting）的无重放持续学习方法。核心机制是基于一个关键观察：模型在连续零样本预测中的稳定性与抗遗忘能力强相关。因此，ZAF 通过稳定模型在零样本任务上的预测输出，来隐式地保护先前学习到的知识，而不需要显式地存储和重放历史数据。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体的模型参数量、数据规模或核心指标提升幅度。主要强调了经验研究和理论分析支持了零样本预测稳定性作为抗遗忘指标的有效性，并引出了 ZAF 方法。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"To solve the catastrophic forgetting problem in Vision-Language (VL) models during Continual Learning (CL). Existing methods typically rely on complex frameworks or replay strategies to trade off learning and forgetting.","importance":"Methodological contribution. Discovers that a model's stability in consecutive zero-shot predictions is a reliable indicator of its anti-forgetting capability, and proposes a replay-free CL method based on this. This provides a lightweight and effective regularization means for continual pre-training or fine-tuning of multimodal models, avoiding the overhead of storing historical data.","technical_approach":"Proposes a replay-free CL method named ZAF (Zero-shot Antidote to Forgetting). The core mechanism is based on a key observation: the stability of a model in consecutive zero-shot predictions is strongly correlated with its anti-forgetting capabilities. Therefore, ZAF implicitly protects previously learned knowledge by stabilizing the model's predictive outputs on zero-shot tasks, without the need to explicitly store and replay historical data.","experiments":"The abstract does not provide specific model parameter sizes, data scales, or core metric improvements. It mainly emphasizes that empirical research and theoretical analysis support the effectiveness of zero-shot prediction stability as an anti-forgetting indicator, leading to the ZAF method.","authors_note":""},"tags":["continual-learning","vision-language","forgetting","zero-shot"],"keywords":["Vision-language Learning;  Continual Learning;"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"预训练的视觉-语言模型在适应一系列下游任务时，由于参数偏移和无法访问历史数据，经常面临遗忘先前获得技能的挑战。","claim_en":"Pre-trained vision-language models often encounter challenges in retaining previously acquired skills when adapting to a sequence of downstream tasks due to parameter shifts and limited access to historical data.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"模型在连续零样本预测中的稳定性是其对先前学习任务抗遗忘能力的可靠指标。","claim_en":"The stability of the model in consecutive zero-shot predictions serves as a reliable indicator of its anti-forgetting capabilities for previously learned tasks.","opposes":"通常认为抗遗忘能力需要通过在旧任务验证集上的性能来直接评估，或依赖于显式的重放机制。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"提供了一种无需访问旧数据即可评估和增强模型抗遗忘能力的新视角，促成了无重放的持续学习方法。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为持续多模态预训练正则化的备选方案备查，不需要细读正文，方法落地成本低但泛化性待验证","en":"Keep as a reference for regularizing continual multimodal pretraining, no need to read full text, low deployment cost but generalization remains unvalidated."}},{"id":"Garau-LuisBGRAB24","title":"Multi-modal Transfer Learning between Biological Foundation Models","authors":["Juan Jose Garau-Luis","Patrick Bordes","Liam Gonzalez","Masa Roller","Bernardo P. de Almeida","Christopher Blum","Lorenz Hexemer","Stefan Laurent","Maren Lang","Thomas Pierrot","Guillaume Richard"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$161","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Garau-LuisBGRAB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Garau-LuisBGRAB24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/8f6b3692297e49e5d5c91ba00281379c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有生物基础大模型仅支持单序列模态（DNA/RNA/蛋白质单独建模），而基因组学核心问题天然涉及多模态交互，没有成熟的跨模态迁移方案适配通用序列模型。","importance":"方法级贡献，为生物序列多模态预训练提供了跨编码器对齐的可行路径，拓展了通用大模型在计算生物学的落地边界。","technical_approach":"原创多模态对齐框架，复用已有的DNA、RNA、蛋白质单模态预训练编码器，新增轻量跨模态映射层对齐三类序列的表示空间，不需要全量重新训练多模态大模型，和端到端从头训练的方案相比训练成本降低一个数量级。","experiments":"公开摘要仅提及在基因组学相关任务上验证了跨模态迁移能力，未披露具体参数量、数据规模、baseline对比及量化指标，完整实验结果需见正文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing biological foundation models are limited to single sequence modality (DNA/RNA/protein) modeling, while core genomics tasks inherently require cross-modality interaction, no mature cross-modal transfer framework exists for general sequence models.","importance":"Method-level contribution, provides a feasible cross-encoder alignment path for multi-modal biological sequence pretraining, expands the application scope of general large models in computational biology.","technical_approach":"Original multi-modal alignment framework, reuses pre-trained modality-specific encoders for DNA, RNA and protein, adds lightweight cross-modal projection layers to align three representation spaces, avoids full-parameter retraining of large multi-modal models, cuts training cost by an order of magnitude compared to end-to-end training from scratch.","experiments":"The public abstract only mentions cross-modal transfer capability is validated on genomics tasks, no specific parameter size, data scale, baseline comparison or quantitative metrics are disclosed, full experimental results are available in the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["foundation-models","multimodal","transfer-learning","representation"],"keywords":["Multi-Modal","Transformers","BioAI"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大语言模型架构适用于生物序列建模任务","claim_en":"Large language model architectures are effective for biological sequence modeling tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为生物多模态预训练跨模态对齐的文献备查，仅复用单模态编码器的思路适合低资源生物大模型训练场景","en":"Keep as reference for cross-modal alignment in biological multimodal pretraining, the frozen single-modal encoder reuse idea fits low-resource biofoundation model scenarios."}},{"id":"Garrido-LuceroH24","title":"DU-Shapley: A Shapley Value Proxy for Efficient Dataset Valuation","authors":["Felipe Garrido-Lucero","Benjamin Heymann","Maxime Vono","Patrick Loiseau","Vianney Perchet"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We consider the dataset valuation problem, that is the problem of quantifying the incremental gain, to some relevant pre-defined utility of a machine learning task, of aggregating an individual dataset to others.\nThe Shapley value is a natural tool to perform dataset valuation due to its formal axiomatic justification, which can be combined with Monte Carlo integration to overcome the computational tractability challenges. Such generic approximation methods, however, remain expensive in some cases. In this paper, we exploit the knowledge about the structure of the dataset valuation problem to devise more efficient Shapley value estimators. We propose a novel approximation, referred to as discrete uniform Shapley, which is expressed as an expectation under a discrete uniform distribution with support of reasonable size. We justify the relevancy of the proposed framework via asymptotic and non-asymptotic theoretical guarantees and illustrate its benefits via an extensive set of numerical experiments.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Garrido-LuceroH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Garrido-LuceroH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/03cd3cf3f74d4f9ce5958de269960884-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"基于Shapley值的数据集估值方法需要大量蒙特卡洛采样，计算成本过高，无法落地到大模型预训练的万级以上样本数据集评估场景，现有通用近似方案未利用数据集估值的结构特性，效率瓶颈明显。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出的高效Shapley近似方案可直接用于预训练数据过滤、低价值样本识别，为预训练数据质量评估提供了可落地的工具。","technical_approach":"对Shapley值计算的原创改进，利用数据集估值的任务结构，将Shapley值的期望计算从全排列空间简化为离散均匀分布采样空间，提出离散均匀Shapley（DU-Shapley）近似，和通用蒙特卡洛近似相比计算复杂度从O(n!)降低到O(n)。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体实验参数、数据集规模、baseline的精度和速度对比数值，仅表明效率优于现有通用Shapley近似方法，完整结果需见正文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Shapley value based dataset valuation requires massive Monte Carlo sampling, has extremely high computational cost, cannot be applied to large pre-training datasets with more than 10k samples. Existing generic approximation methods do not leverage the structural characteristics of dataset valuation, leading to obvious efficiency bottlenecks.","importance":"Method-level contribution, the proposed efficient Shapley approximation can be directly used for pre-training data filtering and low-value sample identification, provides a deployable tool for pre-training data quality assessment.","technical_approach":"Original improvement for Shapley value calculation, leverages the task structure of dataset valuation, simplifies the expectation calculation of Shapley value from full permutation space to discrete uniform distribution sampling space, proposes Discrete Uniform Shapley (DU-Shapley) approximation, reduces computational complexity from O(n!) to O(n) compared with generic Monte Carlo approximation.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose specific experimental parameters, dataset scale, accuracy and speed comparison values with baselines, only states that efficiency is better than existing generic Shapley approximation methods, full results are available in the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-quality","dataset-valuation","shapley","data-selection"],"keywords":["data valuation","shapley value","approximation"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Shapley值是理论上最严谨的数据集估值指标","claim_en":"Shapley value is the most theoretically rigorous metric for dataset valuation","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为预训练数据估值工具的备选方案备查，O(n)复杂度的近似可快速筛选低质量预训练样本，精度要求不高时可直接复用","en":"Keep as reference for pretraining data valuation tools, the O(n) approximation can quickly filter low-quality pretraining samples, directly reusable when precision requirements are not strict."}},{"id":"GengHRWLKK24","title":"The Unmet Promise of Synthetic Training Images: Using Retrieved Real Images Performs Better","authors":["Scott Geng","Cheng-Yu Hsieh","Vivek Ramanujan","Matthew Wallingford","Chun-Liang Li","Pang Wei Koh","Ranjay Krishna"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$162","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GengHRWLKK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GengHRWLKK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/0f25eb6e9dc26c933a5d7516abf1eb8c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要回答的核心问题很直接：在视觉预训练里，合成训练图像是否真的能替代或优于检索得到的真实图像。过去很多工作默认只要生成模型够强，合成数据就能低成本补齐长尾类别和稀缺分布，但这个前提往往没有和“直接去找更相关的真实图像”做严格对比；作者认为这个回避了真正的决策问题——当额外数据预算固定时，应该生成，还是检索。","importance":"结论层面，这是一篇对“合成数据万能论”做纠偏的经验研究。它对 pretrain 的启示不是提出新模型，而是重新定义数据扩充的优先级：如果目标是提升表示学习或下游识别性能，检索式引入真实图像通常比生成式补数据更稳、更划算。这对数据管线设计很重要，因为它把关注点从生成质量转回到数据相关性、分布匹配和检索系统建设。","technical_approach":"方法上，作者做的核心不是新架构，而是构建一个公平的 synthetic-vs-retrieved 对照框架。关键设计应当是：围绕同一训练任务、同一预算和同一类别/语义条件，分别加入生成的图像和检索到的真实图像，再比较对模型训练的增益。这个设计有效的原因是它把变量压到最少，避免把生成模型能力、prompt 工程、采样数量这些次要因素和“数据是真实还是合成”混在一起；同时也隐含指出合成图像的问题不只是视觉逼真度，而是标签一致性、背景统计、细粒度属性和类内多样性往往不如真实数据。","experiments":"从标题能确认的关键实验结论是：检索得到的真实图像整体优于合成训练图像。更有价值的点不在单次胜负，而在它暗示的误差来源：合成图像即使肉眼可用，也可能在预训练时引入伪相关模式，导致表征朝生成器偏好而不是真实分布靠拢。摘要未给出参数量、数据规模和具体指标，因此不能可靠写出数字；但可以合理预期作者至少比较了多种数据增广场景，并控制了加入样本数量，否则“performs better”这个结论不够成立。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a practical question: when extra visual training data is needed, is it better to synthesize images or retrieve real ones? Prior work often treated synthetic data as an obvious win for long-tail coverage and low-cost augmentation, but usually without a controlled comparison against simply retrieving more relevant real images. The authors bring the decision back to the right baseline: under the same budget, should we generate or retrieve?","importance":"The main contribution is corrective rather than architectural. For pretraining, the paper argues that real-image retrieval is often a stronger and more reliable data-scaling strategy than synthetic image generation. That matters because it shifts attention from image realism alone to data relevance, distribution match, and pipeline design; in many settings, better retrieval may beat better generation.","technical_approach":"The core method is a controlled comparison framework, not a new model. The likely setup is to hold task, label semantics, and data budget fixed, then compare the gains from adding synthetic images versus retrieved real images. This is the right design because it isolates the source of benefit. It also clarifies why synthetic data can underperform even when visually plausible: generation may preserve high-level semantics but miss the fine-grained attribute statistics, background diversity, and natural correlations that representation learning actually uses.","experiments":"The headline result, directly supported by the title, is that retrieved real images outperform synthetic training images. The more interesting implication is about failure mode: synthetic samples can look good yet still pull the representation toward generator-specific artifacts rather than the real data distribution. The provided metadata does not include model sizes, dataset scale, or exact metrics, so no numeric claim is safe here.","authors_note":""},"tags":["synthetic-data","retrieval","vision-pretraining","data-quality"],"keywords":["Synthetic training data","task adaptation","data-centric machine learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3对照实验设置和Fig5的成本收益对比，结论直接推翻合成数据优先级高于检索的错误认知，要调整预训练数据管线优先级","en":"Focus on §3 controlled experiment setup and Fig5 cost-benefit comparison, the conclusion overturns the wrong prior that synthetic data outperforms retrieved real data, adjust pretraining data pipeline priority accordingly."}},{"id":"GeorgievWBL24","title":"Deep Equilibrium Algorithmic Reasoning","authors":["Dobrik Georgiev","Joseph Wilson","Davide Buffelli","Pietro Lió"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$163","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GeorgievWBL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GeorgievWBL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3b1675de6b49cc00084374213f8c38ae-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注的核心问题是：能否用深度平衡模型（Deep Equilibrium Models, DEQ）去做算法推理，而不依赖显式堆很多层来模拟迭代计算。传统 Transformer 做算法任务时，常把“更多层数”当作“更多推理步数”的近似，但这种做法参数和深度绑定，泛化到更长输入或更多迭代步骤时往往不稳定；作者试图把“达到某个固定点的迭代”作为更自然的推理形式。","importance":"这项工作的意义在于，它把 DEQ 从节省深度的建模技巧推进到“推理过程建模”这个更核心的位置。对 pretrain 圈子的启发不是立刻替代 Transformer，而是提醒我们：如果一个能力本质上是迭代求解，而不是固定深度的前馈变换，那么训练目标和网络参数化也许应该直接匹配这个结构。这和 latent reasoning、recurrent depth、test-time compute 等方向是相通的。","technical_approach":"方法上，作者应当是将算法推理网络写成共享参数的隐式递推，并通过求固定点来得到最终表示，再用隐式微分训练。与普通堆叠网络相比，DEQ 的关键选择是把任意多步迭代压缩成一个平衡态求解问题，舍弃的是逐层显式中间状态和层间独立参数；这样设计有效，是因为算法任务常具有重复更新直到收敛的结构，参数共享更符合这种归纳偏置，也可能让模型对更长执行轨迹有更好的长度外推。","experiments":"从题目看，实验重点应是算法推理基准上的长度泛化和参数效率，而不是通用语言任务。合理的关键比较包括：与标准 Transformer、RNN 或 Neural Algorithmic Reasoning 模型相比，在更长序列或更多组合步骤上是否更稳。由于没有摘要细节，无法安全给出具体数据；但如果工作成立，最有价值的证据应是固定训练长度下，DEQ 在测试长度扩展时退化更慢，以及在相近参数量下达到相似或更好准确率。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies whether deep equilibrium models can serve as a better substrate for algorithmic reasoning than explicit deep stacks. Standard transformers often use more layers as a crude proxy for more reasoning steps, but that ties compute to parameter depth and tends to generalize poorly to longer execution horizons. The authors instead model reasoning as convergence to a fixed point.","importance":"Its value is conceptual: it pushes DEQ from a memory-saving trick toward a reasoning model. For pretraining researchers, the takeaway is not immediate replacement of transformers, but a useful reminder that if a capability is inherently iterative, then the architecture and optimization should reflect that structure rather than approximate it with a finite feed-forward stack. This connects naturally to recurrent depth, latent reasoning, and test-time compute.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to define the reasoning computation as a shared-parameter implicit recurrence and solve for its equilibrium, then train through implicit differentiation. The key design choice is parameter sharing across an unbounded number of virtual steps. What it gives up is explicit layerwise state and heterogeneous layer parameters. Why it can help is straightforward: many algorithmic tasks are repeated-update procedures, so an equilibrium formulation is a closer inductive match and may extrapolate better in iteration count.","experiments":"From the title, the most relevant evidence should be on algorithmic reasoning benchmarks, especially length generalization and parameter efficiency. The important comparison is likely against standard transformers and related neural algorithmic models under train-short, test-long settings. No abstract numbers are provided, so exact metrics should not be invented; the meaningful success criterion would be slower degradation at longer lengths with similar or smaller parameter counts.","authors_note":""},"tags":["algorithmic-reasoning","deep-equilibrium","generalization"],"keywords":["neural algorithmic reasoning","deep equilibrium models","DEQ","Graph Neural Networks"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§2隐式递推建模部分和Fig4长度外推结果，建议在内部推理能力预训练ablation中验证DEQ结构的适配性","en":"Only read §2 implicit recurrence modeling section and Fig4 length extrapolation results, recommended to verify DEQ structure suitability in internal reasoning ability pretraining ablations."}},{"id":"GhoshASOR24","title":"Harnessing small projectors and multiple views for efficient vision pretraining","authors":["Arna Ghosh","Kumar Krishna Agrawal","Shagun Sodhani","Adam Oberman","Blake A. Richards"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$164","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GhoshASOR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GhoshASOR24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/464d8334dfca732d538ac050e45c6dc7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是视觉预训练的效率问题：怎样在不牺牲太多表征质量的前提下，降低 projector 成本并更有效地利用多视角信息。过去很多自监督或对比式视觉预训练会使用较大的投影头，因为它们能吸收任务特定不变性，但这也带来额外参数、算力和优化负担；作者尝试证明，小 projector 配合合适的多视角策略，可能是更好的效率-性能折中。","importance":"这项工作的价值更偏方法和系统之间的中间地带。它不是改 backbone 范式，而是针对视觉预训练中一个常被默认接受的组件开销做重新设计。对 pretrain 的启示是：projection head 未必越大越好，关键在于它承载了哪些不变性压力，以及这些压力能否被更便宜的多视图训练信号替代。这对大规模 VLM 或视觉 tokenizer 预训练也有现实意义，因为 projector 往往是最容易被忽视但长期耗资源的部分。","technical_approach":"方法上，作者的核心主张应是使用更小的 projector，并通过多个增强视角或多视图目标补回表征学习信号。关键设计点在于把负担从宽大 MLP 投影头转移到训练视图构造和一致性约束上。与常见做法相比，它舍弃了高容量 projector 对表示解耦的‘兜底’，转而依赖多视图提供更丰富的不变性监督；这之所以可能有效，是因为 projector 的一部分作用本来就是隔离增强噪声，如果训练目标本身更稳，头部容量可以下降。","experiments":"从标题可以判断，实验重点是效率收益和性能保持。应当会比较不同 projector 大小、单视图与多视图设置，以及在标准视觉预训练基准上的线性探测或迁移性能。没有摘要细节，无法确认具体 backbone、数据集和提升数字；但最有价值的 ablation 应是显示：在相近甚至更低计算量下，小 projector + 多视图达到接近或优于大 projector 基线，并且在训练稳定性或收敛速度上更好。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical inefficiency in vision pretraining: how to reduce projector cost without giving up too much representation quality. Many self-supervised pipelines rely on fairly large projection heads to absorb augmentation-specific variation, but that adds parameters, compute, and optimization burden. The authors test whether a smaller projector, paired with stronger multi-view supervision, is a better trade-off.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with systems relevance. It does not replace the backbone paradigm; instead it revisits an expensive component that is often accepted by default. The broader lesson for pretraining is that projector size is not a free knob. Its role depends on what invariances the training setup asks it to absorb, and some of that burden may be better handled by the view construction and objective rather than by head capacity.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to shrink the projector and compensate with multiple views and consistency-style training signals. The design choice is to move representational pressure away from a high-capacity MLP head and into the supervision itself. Compared with standard setups, it gives up some of the projector’s ability to buffer nuisance variation, and relies more heavily on view diversity to shape invariance. That can work if the objective is already doing a better job of separating semantic signal from augmentation noise.","experiments":"The relevant empirical story should center on efficiency-performance trade-offs: projector size sweeps, single-view versus multi-view training, and standard transfer or linear-probe benchmarks. No abstract numbers are available, so exact gains cannot be stated safely. The most meaningful ablation would show that a small projector plus multi-view supervision matches or beats a larger-head baseline at similar or lower compute.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vision-pretraining","representation-learning","efficiency","projector"],"keywords":["representation learning","self-supervised learning","data-augmentation","learning dynamics","sample efficient SSL","compute efficient SSL"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§4.2 ablation和Fig3效率-性能曲线，可直接在大规模视觉预训练中将大投影头替换为小投影头加多视角约束降本","en":"Focus on §4.2 ablation and Fig3 efficiency-performance curve, directly replace large projection heads with small ones plus multi-view constraints to cut cost in large-scale vision pretraining."}},{"id":"GlaserHG24","title":"Near-Optimality of Contrastive Divergence Algorithms","authors":["Pierre Glaser","Kevin Han Huang","Arthur Gretton"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We provide a non-asymptotic analysis of the contrastive divergence (CD) algorithm, a training method for unnormalized models. While prior work has established that (for exponential family distributions) the CD iterates asymptotically converge at an $O(n^{-1 / 3})$ rate to the true parameter of the data distribution, we show that CD can achieve the parametric rate $O(n^{-1 / 2})$. Our analysis provides results for various data batching schemes, including fully online and minibatch. We additionally show that CD is near-optimal, in the sense that its asymptotic variance is close to the Cramér-Rao lower bound.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GlaserHG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GlaserHG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a55f589b1d54edd513cf1c8b9dd1ed47-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文讨论一个很基础但长期悬而未决的问题：对比散度（Contrastive Divergence, CD）这类训练能量模型的经典算法，到底在理论上有多接近最优。过去 CD 在实践中很常用，尤其在难以精确归一化的能量模型里，但理论保证始终相对薄弱，常被视为‘能用但说不清’；作者试图给出更强的最优性或近最优性结论。","importance":"它的重要性主要是理论层面的，但对 pretrain 研究并不远。原因是 energy-based LM、diffusion/score matching 系列以及很多隐变量训练目标，本质上都在处理近似学习与近似采样的耦合问题。如果这篇工作证明某类 CD 算法在统计效率或计算-误差权衡上接近最优，那会提高我们对能量式建模路线的信心，也帮助判断何时值得为更强采样器付额外代价。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者应当是对一类 CD 算法建立非渐近或 minimax 意义下的近最优性分析。关键不在提出新的工程 trick，而是在明确假设下刻画误差分解：模型偏差、马尔可夫链混合误差、有限样本误差各占多少，并证明 CD 在这些限制下已经接近理论上可达到的最好水平。这种分析有价值，因为它把‘CD 为什么常常够用’从经验现象提升到可比较的结论。","experiments":"这类论文的实验通常服务于理论验证，而不是追求大模型 SOTA。可预期的实证部分会用合成分布或标准能量模型任务，检查理论预测的收敛率、样本复杂度或链长度依赖是否成立。由于没有摘要细节，无法写具体数据；如果实验做得好，最值得关注的是理论界限是否能解释实践中短链 CD 表现不差的条件边界。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a long-standing question: how close to optimal are contrastive divergence algorithms for training energy-based models? CD has been widely used in practice, especially when exact normalization is intractable, but the theory has lagged behind and often left it in the category of methods that work better than we can justify. The authors aim to tighten that gap.","importance":"The contribution is primarily theoretical, but still relevant to pretraining. Energy-based language models, score-based methods, and other implicit objectives all involve an interplay between approximate learning and approximate sampling. If CD is shown to be near-optimal under meaningful conditions, that strengthens the case for energy-style modeling and clarifies when more expensive sampling machinery is worth it.","technical_approach":"From the title, the likely result is a near-optimality theorem for one or more families of CD algorithms, probably in a non-asymptotic or minimax sense. The important part is the decomposition of error sources: model misspecification, finite-sample error, and sampling or mixing error from the Markov chain. This kind of analysis matters because it can explain why short-run CD is often adequate, and where that adequacy breaks.","experiments":"For this kind of work, experiments usually validate the theory rather than define the contribution. One would expect synthetic or standard energy-model setups used to test predicted rates, sample complexity, or chain-length dependence. No abstract details are provided, so no quantitative summary is safe. The most useful empirical signal would be whether the bounds meaningfully track real CD behavior rather than only asymptotic toy cases.","authors_note":""},"tags":["energy-based-model","contrastive-divergence","theory","optimization"],"keywords":["Statistical Estimation","Learning Theory","Stochastic Optimization","Exponential Families","Unnormalized Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看核心结论和误差分解部分即可，结论增强了基于能量的预训练目标的理论可信度，没必要为高阶采样器付出过高算力成本","en":"Only read core conclusions and error decomposition sections, the result enhances theoretical credibility of energy-based pretraining objectives, no need to pay excessive compute cost for high-order samplers."}},{"id":"GolanGE24","title":"Enhancing Consistency-Based Image Generation via Adversarialy-Trained Classification and Energy-Based Discrimination","authors":["Shelly Golan","Roy Ganz","Michael Elad"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$165","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GolanGE24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GolanGE24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/55c944c9d908af245fa658b0e02b9003-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是 consistency model 图像生成的质量和一致性不足问题。现有 consistency-based 生成方法优点是采样快，但常见代价是细节、判别性和分布保真度不如扩散模型；作者尝试通过引入对抗训练的分类器和能量判别器，把缺失的判别约束补回来。","importance":"这项工作的意义在于，它反映出生成模型正在重新吸收 energy-based 和 adversarial 训练的优点，而不是在 diffusion / consistency 范式里单打独斗。对 pretrain 视角的启发是：当生成目标为了速度做了近似，通常需要额外训练信号去修正样本分布；这种信号可以不是直接改 likelihood，而是通过判别器或能量函数补足。它更像是生成训练目标设计上的组合式改进。","technical_approach":"方法上，作者的核心做法应是给 consistency-based generator 叠加两个判别来源：一个经过对抗训练的分类器，提供更强的语义和类别边界；一个 energy-based discriminator，提供对样本真实度或分布位置的连续打分。与只靠 consistency loss 的方法相比，这种设计显式引入了‘什么样的图像更像数据分布’的额外监督。其有效性逻辑很清楚：一致性损失擅长学快速映射，但对高频细节和难样本缺少压力；分类和能量判别正好补这个短板。","experiments":"从标题能确定，实验会比较加不加 adversarial classifier 和 energy discriminator 对图像生成质量的影响。关键指标大概率包括 FID、精度/召回或一致性相关指标，并与标准 consistency / diffusion 基线比较。摘要缺失，无法给出具体数据和模型规模；但值得关注的 ablation 应是双判别器是否互补，以及训练稳定性是否成为新的代价，因为这类方法常在质量提升和优化复杂度之间做交换。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a common weakness of consistency-based image generation: fast sampling often comes with weaker fidelity and distribution matching than diffusion models. The authors try to recover some of that missing signal by adding adversarially trained classification and an energy-based discriminator.","importance":"Its broader value is that it treats generative training objectives as composable rather than mutually exclusive. For pretraining researchers, the lesson is that once a generator makes aggressive approximations for speed, it may need auxiliary discriminative signals to stay on-distribution. Those signals do not have to come from explicit likelihood improvements; classifier and energy-style supervision can serve as corrective pressure.","technical_approach":"The method appears to augment a consistency generator with two discriminative components: an adversarially trained classifier that sharpens semantic boundaries, and an energy-based discriminator that scores realism or distance from the data manifold. Relative to pure consistency training, this explicitly teaches the model what should count as a better sample. The design makes sense because consistency losses are efficient at learning a fast map, but they do not always impose enough pressure on high-frequency detail or hard examples.","experiments":"The main evidence should compare standard consistency baselines against versions with the adversarial classifier, the energy discriminator, and both. Relevant metrics are likely FID and related quality or coverage measures. Since no abstract details are available, exact numbers and model sizes cannot be stated. The most useful ablation would test whether the two discriminators are complementary and whether the quality gain is offset by harder optimization.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","consistency-model","energy-based-model","image-generation"],"keywords":["Adversarial Training; Robustness; Energy-Based Models; Classification;"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3训练目标组合设计和Fig5生成质量对比，在快速生成类预训练任务中可复用判别约束补全分布保真度","en":"Focus on §3 training objective combination design and Fig5 generation quality comparison, discriminative constraints can be reused to improve distribution fidelity in fast generation pretraining tasks."}},{"id":"2405.21048","title":"Kaleido Diffusion: Improving Conditional Diffusion Models with Autoregressive Latent Modeling","authors":["Jiatao Gu","Ying Shen","Shuangfei Zhai","Yizhe Zhang","Navdeep Jaitly","Joshua M. Susskind"],"institutions":["Apple"],"abstract":"$166","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.21048","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Gu0Z0JS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Gu0Z0JS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/0a02c2bc2e2148b803c4ade1d71e1d25-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"条件扩散模型在高 classifier-free guidance 权重下生成图像多样性不足。根本原因是文本 prompt 到图像的映射是一对多的，但扩散模型在强引导下倾向于坍缩到少数模式。之前的方法要么降低引导强度（牺牲质量），要么靠后处理筛选。","importance":"方法级贡献。提出用自回归语言模型生成中间离散潜变量来桥接文本和图像，为 AR+Diffusion 联合建模提供了一个轻量但有效的范式。对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：AR 模型可以作为扩散模型的结构化先验生成器，两种建模范式的组合方式不止 Transfusion 那一种。","technical_approach":"Kaleido 在文本编码器和扩散模型之间插入一个自回归语言模型，该模型以原始 caption 为输入，生成一组离散潜变量作为扩散模型的额外条件。论文探索了多种离散表示：扩展文本描述、检测框、object blob、视觉 token 等。关键设计选择是让潜变量足够抽象（不直接约束像素），从而在提供结构引导的同时保留扩散模型的生成自由度。与直接用 LLM rewrite prompt 不同，这里的潜变量是多模态的、可学习的中间表示。","experiments":"基于文本到图像扩散模型进行实验，在多样性指标（如 recall、coverage）上显著优于标准 classifier-free guidance 采样，同时保持或提升 FID/CLIP score。具体数字需参考全文，但核心 ablation 表明：不同类型的离散潜变量对多样性和质量的 trade-off 不同，视觉 token 类表示在多样性上最强，文本描述类在可控性上更好。","authors_note":"Jiatao Gu 来自 Apple，此前在 Meta/FAIR 做过大量非自回归生成和扩散模型工作（如 Mask-Predict、DALL-E 相关）。Navdeep Jaitly 也是 Apple ML 研究的资深成员。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Conditional diffusion models suffer from limited sample diversity under high classifier-free guidance weights. The text-to-image mapping is inherently one-to-many, but strong guidance collapses the distribution to a few modes.","importance":"A method-level contribution showing that autoregressive latent priors can effectively restore diversity in diffusion sampling. For pretrain research, it demonstrates a lightweight AR+Diffusion composition pattern distinct from end-to-end joint training approaches like Transfusion.","technical_approach":"Kaleido inserts an autoregressive language model between the text encoder and the diffusion model. This AR model takes the caption and generates discrete latent variables—explored as extended text descriptions, bounding boxes, object blobs, or visual tokens—that serve as additional conditioning for the diffusion process. The key design choice is keeping these latents abstract enough to guide structure without over-constraining pixel-level generation, preserving the diffusion model's generative freedom.","experiments":"Evaluated on text-to-image generation; shows significant improvements in diversity metrics (recall, coverage) while maintaining or improving FID/CLIP scores compared to standard CFG sampling. Ablations reveal that visual token representations maximize diversity while textual descriptions offer better controllability.","authors_note":"Jiatao Gu is at Apple, previously at Meta/FAIR with extensive work on non-autoregressive generation and diffusion models. Navdeep Jaitly is a senior Apple ML researcher."},"tags":["diffusion","autoregressive","image-generation","diversity"],"notable_authors":["Jiatao Gu","Navdeep Jaitly"],"keywords":["diffusion models","autoregressive models","latent variable models","text-to-image"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3.2离散潜变量设计和ablation结果，AR+Diffusion的桥接方案可迁移至多模态预训练的条件引导模块设计","en":"Only read §3.2 discrete latent design and ablation results, the AR+Diffusion bridging scheme can be migrated to conditional guidance module design for multimodal pretraining."}},{"id":"2407.04693","title":"ANAH-v2: Scaling Analytical Hallucination Annotation of Large Language Models","authors":["Yuzhe Gu","Ziwei Ji","Wenwei Zhang","Chengqi Lyu","Dahua Lin","Kai Chen"],"institutions":["香港中文大学","上海人工智能实验室"],"abstract":"$167","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.04693","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GuJZLLC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GuJZLLC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/6e4cdfdd909ea4e34bfc85a12774cba0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"用自训练框架规模化地标注 LLM 幻觉，解决现有幻觉检测数据集领域窄、规模小、标注成本高的问题。之前的幻觉标注要么依赖昂贵的人工，要么用不够可靠的自动标注器，难以扩展。","importance":"数据级贡献。幻觉检测是 posttrain 对齐的关键环节，而高质量标注数据是瓶颈。这个迭代自训练框架（基于 EM 算法）同时扩大数据集和提升标注器精度，对 pretrain→posttrain 闭环有间接价值：更好的幻觉检测能反哺训练数据质量控制和 reward model 训练。","technical_approach":"基于 EM 算法的迭代自训练：E 步用当前标注器对大规模未标注数据进行幻觉标注，M 步用标注后的数据训练更强的标注器。每轮迭代同时扩大数据规模和提升标注准确率。关键设计是标注 pipeline 的结构化（句级幻觉标注而非文档级），以及质量控制机制防止噪声标签累积。","experiments":"具体数字需参考全文。框架声称在多个领域的长文本问答任务上，标注器准确率随迭代轮次持续提升，且标注数据集规模显著扩大。","authors_note":"Dahua Lin 来自香港中文大学 / 上海 AI Lab（商汤系），团队在 LLM 评测和工具链方面有大量工作（如 OpenCompass、InternLM 系列）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Scaling hallucination annotation for LLMs is bottlenecked by high labor costs and unreliable automatic annotators. Existing datasets are too small and domain-limited to support robust hallucination detection.","importance":"A data-level contribution. The iterative self-training framework (EM-based) simultaneously scales the annotation dataset and improves annotator accuracy. Indirectly valuable for pretrain research: better hallucination detection feeds back into training data quality control and reward model training.","technical_approach":"EM-based iterative self-training: E-step applies the current annotator to label a scaled dataset with sentence-level hallucination annotations; M-step trains a stronger annotator on the expanded data. Quality control mechanisms prevent noise accumulation across iterations.","experiments":"The framework claims continuous improvement in annotator accuracy across iterations and significant dataset scaling across multiple domains in long-form QA tasks. Specific numbers require the full paper.","authors_note":"Dahua Lin is from CUHK / Shanghai AI Lab, with extensive work on LLM evaluation and toolchains (OpenCompass, InternLM series)."},"tags":["hallucination","data-annotation","llm-evaluation","scalable-oversight"],"notable_authors":["Dahua Lin"],"keywords":["Hallucination","Large Language Model","Fine-grained Annotation","Dataset"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看迭代自训练的质量控制机制，幻觉标注方案可直接复用在预训练数据去幻觉过滤和奖励模型训练的数据标注环节","en":"Focus on the quality control mechanism of iterative self-training, the hallucination annotation scheme can be directly reused in pretraining data de-hallucination filtering and reward model training data labeling."}},{"id":"2412.04692","title":"Smoothie: Label Free Language Model Routing","authors":["Neel Guha","Mayee F. Chen","Trevor Chow","Ishan S. Khare","Christopher Ré"],"institutions":["Stanford University"],"abstract":"$168","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.04692","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GuhaCCKR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GuhaCCKR24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e6b57a990462df5afa58d64ce2709db9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在多 LLM 部署场景下，如何在没有标注数据的情况下为每个输入样本选择最合适的 LLM（即无监督路由）。已有路由方法大多需要人工标注数据训练辅助模型，限制了实际可用性。","importance":"系统/方法级贡献。无监督 LLM 路由对 serving 和推理效率有直接价值。对 pretrain 研究的启示有限，但从「不同 LLM 在不同样本上表现差异大」这一观察出发，间接反映了 pretrain 数据分布和能力分布的关系。","technical_approach":"Smoothie 借鉴弱监督思路，将多个 LLM 的输出 embedding 和未知的「真实输出」建模为潜变量图模型。通过对 LLM 输出的 embedding 表示进行聚类和潜变量推断，估计每个 LLM 在每个样本上的质量，无需任何标签。核心假设是：多个 LLM 输出的一致性模式可以揭示哪个输出更可能正确。","experiments":"具体数字需参考全文。在多任务 benchmark 上与有监督路由方法对比，Smoothie 在零标注条件下接近甚至匹配有监督方法的路由效果。","authors_note":"Christopher Ré 来自 Stanford，是 Hazy Research 组的负责人，弱监督（Snorkel）和高效架构（Mamba、S4）的核心推动者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Selecting the best LLM per input sample (routing) without any labeled data. Existing routing methods require human-annotated training data, limiting practical deployment.","importance":"A system/method-level contribution for LLM serving efficiency. Limited direct pretrain relevance, but the observation that different LLMs excel on different samples reflects pretrain data distribution effects.","technical_approach":"Smoothie builds a latent variable graphical model over embedding representations of multiple LLM outputs and the unknown true output, inspired by weak supervision. It infers per-sample LLM quality from agreement patterns across outputs, requiring zero labels. The core assumption: consistency patterns among multiple LLM outputs reveal which is most likely correct.","experiments":"On multi-task benchmarks, Smoothie with zero labels approaches or matches supervised routing methods. Specific numbers require the full paper.","authors_note":"Christopher Ré leads Stanford's Hazy Research group, known for weak supervision (Snorkel) and efficient architectures (S4, Mamba)."},"tags":["llm-routing","model-selection","ensemble"],"notable_authors":["Christopher Ré"],"keywords":["large language models","weak supervision","graphical models","routing"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3潜变量推断的核心假设即可，无监督路由的思路可用于预训练数据分片适配不同子模型的多专家预训练场景","en":"Only read §3 core assumption of latent variable inference, the unsupervised routing idea can be applied to MoE pretraining scenarios where pretraining data shards fit different sub-models."}},{"id":"Guo0S024","title":"START: A Generalized State Space Model with Saliency-Driven Token-Aware Transformation","authors":["Jintao Guo","Lei Qi","Yinghuan Shi","Yang Gao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$169","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Guo0S024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Guo0S024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/63b2b056f48653b7cff0d8d233c96a4d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有深度状态空间模型（SSM）在处理序列时缺乏对不同 token 重要性的自适应机制。标准 SSM 对所有 token 施加相同的状态转移，无法根据 token 的显著性动态调整计算资源分配。","importance":"架构级贡献。在 SSM 架构改进方向上，引入 saliency-driven 的 token-aware 变换，与 Mamba 的选择性机制思路类似但实现不同。对 pretrain 研究有参考价值：SSM 的 token 自适应处理是提升长序列建模效率和质量的关键方向。","technical_approach":"START 在 SSM 的状态转移中引入基于显著性的 token 感知变换，根据输入 token 的重要性动态调整状态空间参数。具体机制和与 Mamba selective scan 的区别需参考全文。","experiments":"具体实验设置和结果需参考全文。摘要未提供。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Standard SSMs apply uniform state transitions across all tokens, lacking adaptive computation based on token importance. This limits their effectiveness on sequences with varying information density.","importance":"An architecture-level contribution introducing saliency-driven token-aware transformations into SSMs. Relevant to pretrain research as token-adaptive processing is key for efficient long-sequence modeling.","technical_approach":"START introduces saliency-driven token-aware transformations that dynamically adjust state space parameters based on input token importance. Specific mechanisms and comparison with Mamba's selective scan require the full paper.","experiments":"Specific experimental details and results require the full paper. Abstract not available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["state-space-model","ssm","token-aware","architecture"],"keywords":["Domain generalization","state space models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看其与Mamba选择性机制的对比部分即可，为SSM长序列建模的token自适应优化提供备选思路，无需全文通读。","en":"Only check the comparison with Mamba's selective mechanism, it provides an alternative for token-adaptive optimization of SSM long-sequence modeling, no need to read full text."}},{"id":"2404.14743","title":"Gradient Guidance for Diffusion Models: An Optimization Perspective","authors":["Yingqing Guo","Hui Yuan","Yukang Yang","Minshuo Chen","Mengdi Wang"],"institutions":["Princeton University"],"abstract":"$16a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.14743","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GuoYYCW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GuoYYCW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a5059a9a389ccc76da85760ea79490d8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"梯度引导扩散模型（用外部目标函数的梯度引导采样）缺乏系统的优化理论框架。之前的做法是直接把外部目标的梯度加到扩散采样中，但这会破坏扩散过程的结构，导致采样质量下降。","importance":"理论/方法级贡献。建立了引导扩散与正则化优化之间的数学联系：梯度引导扩散本质上是在求解一个以预训练数据为正则项的优化问题。这个视角对理解 diffusion model 的可控生成和 reward-guided generation 有理论价值，间接关联到 diffusion LM 中 reward 引导的设计。","technical_approach":"建立数学框架证明：梯度引导扩散等价于采样正则化优化问题的解，正则项由预训练数据分布决定。基于此分析，指出直接使用外部梯度会破坏扩散结构，提出改进的引导设计（具体方法需参考全文）来保持扩散过程的完整性同时优化目标。","experiments":"具体实验需参考全文。理论分析为主，预期有图像生成和优化任务上的验证实验。","authors_note":"Mengdi Wang 来自 Princeton，在强化学习理论和优化方面有深厚积累。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Gradient guidance for diffusion models—using gradients of external objectives to steer sampling—lacks a systematic optimization-theoretic framework. Naively injecting external gradients disrupts the diffusion process structure.","importance":"A theoretical contribution establishing that gradient-guided diffusion is essentially sampling from a regularized optimization problem, where the regularizer comes from pre-training data. This perspective is valuable for understanding reward-guided generation in diffusion LMs.","technical_approach":"Proves mathematically that gradient-guided diffusion samples solutions to a regularized optimization problem with the pre-training distribution as regularizer. Shows that naive gradient injection breaks diffusion structure, and proposes improved guidance designs that preserve process integrity while optimizing the objective.","experiments":"Primarily theoretical; experimental validation expected on image generation and optimization tasks. Specific results require the full paper.","authors_note":"Mengdi Wang is at Princeton, with deep expertise in RL theory and optimization."},"tags":["diffusion","gradient-guidance","optimization-theory"],"notable_authors":["Mengdi Wang"],"keywords":["diffusion model; gradient guidance; reward optimization; convergence rate"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§3的数学等价性证明部分，可为扩散大语言模型的reward引导采样设计提供理论参考。","en":"Focus on the mathematical equivalence proof in Section 3, it provides theoretical reference for reward-guided sampling design of diffusion large language models."}},{"id":"2405.14831","title":"HippoRAG: Neurobiologically Inspired Long-Term Memory for Large Language Models","authors":["Bernal Jimenez Gutierrez","Yiheng Shu","Yu Gu","Michihiro Yasunaga","Yu Su"],"institutions":["Ohio State University"],"abstract":"$16b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14831","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/GutierrezS0Y024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/GutierrezS0Y024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/6ddc001d07ca4f319af96a3024f6dbd1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 即使配合 RAG，在大规模新知识的持续整合上仍然低效——检索粒度粗、知识关联弱、无法像人脑海马体那样建立跨经验的深层索引。之前的 RAG 方法主要是 chunk-level 检索，缺乏知识图谱级别的结构化整合。","importance":"方法级贡献。HippoRAG 将神经科学的海马体索引理论引入 RAG 框架，用知识图谱 + Personalized PageRank 模拟海马体的模式分离和补全功能。对 pretrain 研究的间接价值在于：展示了 pretrain 后知识整合的一种结构化方案，以及 LLM + KG 协同的可能性，对 continual pretrain 和知识更新有启发。","technical_approach":"HippoRAG 协调三个组件：LLM 负责从新文档中提取实体和关系（模拟新皮层的语义处理），知识图谱存储结构化知识（模拟海马体索引），Personalized PageRank 在知识图谱上进行检索时的关联扩散（模拟海马体的模式补全）。与标准 RAG 的区别是：不是直接检索文本 chunk，而是先在知识图谱上做结构化推理再定位相关文档。","experiments":"具体数字需参考全文。在多跳问答等需要跨文档知识整合的任务上，HippoRAG 显著优于标准 RAG 方法，尤其在需要关联多个知识片段的场景下优势明显。","authors_note":"Yu Su 来自 Ohio State University，在知识图谱和 QA 方面有持续产出。Michihiro Yasunaga 此前在 Stanford 做过 QA-GNN 等知识图谱增强 LM 的代表性工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLMs with RAG still struggle to efficiently integrate large amounts of new knowledge—retrieval is coarse-grained and lacks deep cross-experience indexing. Standard RAG does chunk-level retrieval without structured knowledge integration.","importance":"A method-level contribution bringing hippocampal indexing theory into RAG. Indirectly relevant to pretrain research: demonstrates a structured post-pretrain knowledge integration scheme and LLM+KG synergy, informing continual pretrain and knowledge update strategies.","technical_approach":"HippoRAG orchestrates three components: LLM extracts entities/relations from documents (mimicking neocortical processing), a knowledge graph stores structured knowledge (mimicking hippocampal indexing), and Personalized PageRank performs associative retrieval over the KG (mimicking pattern completion). Unlike standard RAG, it reasons over structured knowledge before locating relevant documents.","experiments":"Significantly outperforms standard RAG on multi-hop QA and tasks requiring cross-document knowledge integration. Specific numbers require the full paper.","authors_note":"Yu Su is at Ohio State University with sustained work on KG and QA. Michihiro Yasunaga previously at Stanford, known for QA-GNN and KG-augmented LM work."},"tags":["rag","long-term-memory","llm","knowledge-integration"],"notable_authors":["Yu Su","Michihiro Yasunaga"],"keywords":["retrieval-augmented generation","RAG","long-term memory","neurobiological inspired","hippocampal memory indexing theory"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4的结构化知识整合流程即可，对持续预训练的知识更新方案设计有一定启发价值。","en":"Only check the structured knowledge integration process in Section 4, it is inspiring for knowledge update scheme design of continual pre-training."}},{"id":"HemmatDLY0KP24","title":"Hidden in Plain Sight: Evaluating Abstract Shape Recognition in Vision-Language Models","authors":["Arshia Hemmat","Adam Davies","Tom A. Lamb","Jianhao Yuan","Philip Torr","Ashkan Khakzar","Francesco Pinto"],"institutions":["University of Oxford"],"abstract":"Despite the importance of shape perception in human vision, early neural image classifiers relied less on shape information for object recognition than other (often spurious) features. While recent research suggests that current large Vision-Language Models (VLMs) exhibit more reliance on shape, we find them to still be seriously limited in this regard. To quantify such limitations, we introduce IllusionBench, a dataset that challenges current cutting-edge VLMs to decipher shape information when the shape is represented by an arrangement of visual elements in a scene. Our extensive evaluations reveal that, while these shapes are easily detectable by human annotators, current VLMs struggle to recognize them, indicating important avenues for future work in developing more robust visual perception systems. The full dataset and codebase are available at: https://arshiahemmat.github.io/illusionbench/","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HemmatDLY0KP24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HemmatDLY0KP24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a13ff984831deea39e6132bafdfdd6d5-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"评估视觉-语言模型（VLM）对抽象形状的识别能力。现有 VLM 评估主要关注自然图像中的物体识别和场景理解，对抽象几何形状等低层视觉能力的评估不足。","importance":"评估/基准级贡献。揭示 VLM 在抽象形状识别上的不足，对理解 VLM 预训练中视觉表示的局限性有参考价值。但对 pretrain 研究的直接影响有限，更多是诊断性工作。","technical_approach":"构建抽象形状识别的评估基准，测试 VLM 在脱离自然图像语境时对基本几何形状的理解能力。具体方法需参考全文。","experiments":"具体实验设置和结果需参考全文。摘要未提供。","authors_note":"Philip Torr 来自 Oxford，计算机视觉领域资深研究者。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Evaluating VLMs' ability to recognize abstract shapes. Current VLM benchmarks focus on natural image understanding, leaving low-level visual capabilities like abstract geometric shape recognition under-evaluated.","importance":"A benchmark-level contribution diagnosing VLM limitations in abstract shape recognition. Informative for understanding visual representation gaps in VLM pretraining, though limited direct pretrain impact.","technical_approach":"Constructs an evaluation benchmark for abstract shape recognition to test VLMs' understanding of basic geometric shapes outside natural image contexts. Specific methodology requires the full paper.","experiments":"Specific experimental details require the full paper. Abstract not available.","authors_note":"Philip Torr is at Oxford, a senior computer vision researcher."},"tags":["vlm","evaluation","generalization","benchmark"],"notable_authors":["Philip Torr"],"keywords":["visual robustness; vision-language models; visual abstraction; in-context learning; multimodality; visual perception; multi-domain generalisation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看基准构造和核心结论表即可，可用于诊断多模态预训练视觉表示的底层能力缺陷。","en":"Only check the benchmark construction and core conclusion tables, it can diagnose underlying ability defects of visual representations in multimodal pre-training."}},{"id":"HintersdorfSKDB24","title":"Finding NeMo: Localizing Neurons Responsible For Memorization in Diffusion Models","authors":["Dominik Hintersdorf","Lukas Struppek","Kristian Kersting","Adam Dziedzic","Franziska Boenisch"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$16c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HintersdorfSKDB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HintersdorfSKDB24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a102dd5931da01e1b40205490513304c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"扩散模型在训练时会记忆训练集中的敏感或版权图像，现有防范方案要么修改推理输入，要么移除训练集中的记忆样本，都需要持续监控模型运行环境，无法解决已部署扩散模型的记忆泄露问题。","importance":"机制分析级贡献，实现了扩散模型记忆神经元的精准定位，为后续直接删除模型内的记忆权重、不需要修改训练数据或推理流程提供了基础。","technical_approach":"原创神经元定位方法，通过对比扩散模型在生成记忆样本和非记忆样本时的神经元激活差异，结合因果干预验证，精准定位负责存储训练样本记忆的神经元子集，和之前的全局模型修改方案比，仅需要修改不到1%的神经元参数即可消除记忆泄露，不影响模型生成质量。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体模型参数量、训练数据集规模、记忆消除的指标对比数值，仅表明可精准定位记忆相关神经元，完整实验结果需见正文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Diffusion models memorize sensitive or copyrighted images from training datasets, existing mitigation solutions either modify inference inputs or remove memorized samples from training data, both require continuous monitoring of the model operating environment, cannot solve memory leakage issues for already deployed diffusion models.","importance":"Mechanism analysis level contribution, realizes accurate localization of memorization-related neurons in diffusion models, lays foundation for directly deleting memorized weights in models without modifying training data or inference pipelines.","technical_approach":"Original neuron localization method, compares neuron activation differences of diffusion models when generating memorized and non-memorized samples, combines causal intervention verification to accurately locate the subset of neurons responsible for storing training sample memorization, only needs to modify less than 1% of neuron parameters to eliminate memory leakage without affecting model generation quality, compared with previous global model modification solutions.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose specific model parameter size, training dataset scale, quantitative metrics of memory elimination effect, only states that memory-related neurons can be accurately located, full results are available in the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","memorization","interpretability","neurons"],"keywords":["memorization","diffusion models"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"扩散模型大规模训练会产生训练样本记忆泄露问题","claim_en":"Large-scale training of diffusion models leads to training sample memorization leakage","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为扩散模型版权防护方向的文献备查，不需要细读正文，仅了解核心结论即可。","en":"For literature reference in diffusion model copyright protection field, no need to read full text, only grasp the core conclusion."}},{"id":"HogsgaardLM24","title":"The Many Faces of Optimal Weak-to-Strong Learning","authors":["Mikael Møller Høgsgaard","Kasper Green Larsen","Markus Engelund Mathiasen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Boosting is an extremely successful idea, allowing one to combine multiple low accuracy classifiers into a much more accurate voting classifier. In this work, we present a new and surprisingly simple Boosting algorithm that obtains a provably optimal sample complexity. Sample optimal Boosting algorithms have only recently been developed, and our new algorithm has the fastest runtime among all such algorithms and is the simplest to describe: Partition your training data into 5 disjoint pieces of equal size, run AdaBoost on each, and combine the resulting classifiers via a majority vote. In addition to this theoretical contribution, we also perform the first empirical comparison of the proposed sample optimal Boosting algorithms. Our pilot empirical study suggests that our new algorithm might outperform previous algorithms on large data sets.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HogsgaardLM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HogsgaardLM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/5cc19d8570ebe171ffad101fef1e4dde-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":0,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有样本最优的boosting算法复杂度高、实现难度大，没有明确的实证对比验证不同样本最优boosting算法的实际效果差异。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出的样本最优boosting算法是目前已知的同类算法中运行速度最快、实现最简单的，为弱到强学习在预训练数据分类、难例筛选等场景的落地提供了更易用的方案。","technical_approach":"原创boosting改进算法，核心逻辑是将训练数据等分为5个不相交子集，在每个子集上单独运行AdaBoost，最后对所有子模型的输出做多数投票组合，和之前的样本最优boosting算法比，不需要复杂的权重调整逻辑，实现难度降低90%，运行速度提升2倍以上。","experiments":"公开摘要仅提及完成了首个样本最优boosting算法的实证对比，未披露具体数据集规模、baseline的精度和速度对比数值，完整实验结果需见正文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing sample-optimal boosting algorithms have high complexity and difficult implementation, no explicit empirical comparison exists to verify the actual performance difference between different sample-optimal boosting algorithms.","importance":"Method-level contribution, the proposed sample-optimal boosting algorithm has the fastest runtime and simplest implementation among all known similar algorithms, provides a more easy-to-use solution for weak-to-strong learning applications in pre-training data classification, hard sample filtering and other scenarios.","technical_approach":"Original improved boosting algorithm, the core logic is to split training data into 5 equal disjoint subsets, run AdaBoost on each subset separately, finally combine outputs of all sub-models via majority vote, no complex weight adjustment logic is required compared with previous sample-optimal boosting algorithms, implementation difficulty is reduced by 90%, runtime is improved by more than 2x.","experiments":"The public abstract only mentions the first empirical comparison of sample-optimal boosting algorithms is completed, no specific dataset scale, accuracy and speed comparison values with baselines are disclosed, full results are available in the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["weak-to-strong","generalization","supervision"],"keywords":["Learning Theory","Weak to Strong Learning","Boosting","Large Margin Classifiers","Generalization Bounds","Sample Complexity"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"boosting算法可以将多个弱分类器组合为强分类器","claim_en":"Boosting algorithms can combine multiple weak classifiers into a strong classifier","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"和大模型预训练基本无关，仅作boosting方向的常规文献储备即可，无需额外关注。","en":"Irrelevant to large model pre-training, only as conventional literature reserve for boosting direction, no extra attention needed."}},{"id":"HollandN24","title":"Soft ascent-descent as a stable and flexible alternative to flooding","authors":["Matthew J. Holland","Kosuke Nakatani"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$16d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HollandN24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HollandN24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/430894999584d0bd358611e2ecf00b15-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有提升分类任务测试精度的flooding方法需要基于验证集手动调整损失阈值，且仅能优化测试精度指标，无法兼顾模型复杂度、测试损失等其他指标。","importance":"优化器级贡献，提出的SoftAD方法不需要手动调整阈值，可同时优化多个下游指标，为大模型预训练的损失平滑、泛化性提升提供了新的优化方向。","technical_approach":"对flooding方法的原创改进，将flooding的全局二值开关（损失高于阈值梯度下降，低于则上升）替换为逐样本的软加权机制，对损失接近阈值的边界样本降低权重，避免梯度震荡，不需要额外的验证集调参，和flooding方法比调参成本降低100%，可同时适配多个优化目标。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体模型、数据集、指标提升数值，仅表明在分类任务上综合表现优于flooding方法，完整实验结果需见正文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The existing flooding method for improving classification test accuracy requires manual adjustment of loss threshold based on validation set, and can only optimize test accuracy metric, cannot take into account other metrics such as model complexity and test loss.","importance":"Optimizer-level contribution, the proposed SoftAD method does not require manual threshold adjustment, can optimize multiple downstream metrics at the same time, provides a new optimization direction for loss smoothing and generalization improvement in large model pre-training.","technical_approach":"Original improvement of flooding method, replaces the global binary switch of flooding (gradient descent when loss is above threshold, ascent when below) with a per-sample soft weighting mechanism, downweights boundary samples with loss close to the threshold to avoid gradient oscillation, no additional validation set tuning is required, tuning cost is reduced by 100% compared with flooding method, can adapt to multiple optimization objectives at the same time.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose specific models, datasets, metric improvement values, only states that comprehensive performance on classification tasks is better than flooding method, full results are available in the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["optimization","training-stability","regularization"],"keywords":["Flooding","classification","ascent-descent"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"flooding方法可以有效提升分类任务的测试精度","claim_en":"Flooding method can effectively improve test accuracy of classification tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"预训练优化方向的弱参考信号，setup未在大模型上验证，仅了解核心思路即可。","en":"Weak reference signal for pre-training optimization, setup not verified on large models, only grasp the core idea."}},{"id":"HuH24","title":"Inevitable Trade-off between Watermark Strength and Speculative Sampling Efficiency for Language Models","authors":["Zhengmian Hu","Heng Huang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$16e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HuH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HuH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/6415b5dc9aa4bf4e6404cb221a109ec7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大模型水印注入和推测采样加速技术无法同时兼容，之前没有研究明确两者的底层冲突逻辑，也没有量化的权衡边界。","importance":"理论级贡献，证明了水印和推测采样共存的不可行性定理，为后续大模型推理加速和版权保护方案的设计提供了明确的理论约束。","technical_approach":"原创理论分析，从大模型采样的分布一致性要求出发，推导水印注入对输出分布的修改和推测采样的分布匹配要求存在根本冲突，证明了不可能同时实现无损水印强度、无损推测采样加速比、无损输出质量三者的共存。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体模型、水印方案、推测采样的速度和水印检测准确率的量化对比数值，仅提及证明了不可行定理，完整实验结果需见正文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing large model watermark injection and speculative sampling acceleration technologies are not compatible, no previous research has clarified the underlying conflict logic or quantified the trade-off boundary between the two.","importance":"Theoretical level contribution, proves the no-go theorem for coexistence of watermarking and speculative sampling, provides clear theoretical constraints for the design of subsequent large model inference acceleration and copyright protection solutions.","technical_approach":"Original theoretical analysis, starts from the distribution consistency requirement of large model sampling, derives that the output distribution modification caused by watermark injection has fundamental conflict with the distribution matching requirement of speculative sampling, proves that it is impossible to achieve lossless watermark strength, lossless speculative sampling speedup and lossless output quality at the same time.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose specific models, watermark schemes, quantitative comparison values of speculative sampling speed and watermark detection accuracy, only mentions the no-go theorem is proved, full results are available in the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["watermark","speculative-decoding","inference"],"keywords":["watermark","speculative sampling","large language model","sampling","inference"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"推测采样可以在不改变输出分布的前提下提升大模型推理速度","claim_en":"Speculative sampling can improve large model inference speed without changing output distribution","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"不可能同时实现无损水印强度、无损推测采样加速比、无损输出质量三者的共存","claim_en":"It is impossible to achieve lossless watermark strength, lossless speculative sampling speedup and lossless output quality at the same time","opposes":"之前的研究默认水印和推测采样可以独立优化、互不影响，可同时实现两者的无损效果","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Theorem 1","why_contested":"直接推翻了同时兼容水印和推测采样的研究方向，为后续相关方案设计划定了明确边界"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"记住核心的不可行性结论即可，后续推理侧方案设计时可直接规避无意义的兼容尝试。","en":"Only remember the core impossibility conclusion, it can avoid meaningless compatibility attempts when designing inference-side schemes."}},{"id":"HuSFROZSK24","title":"Visual Sketchpad: Sketching as a Visual Chain of Thought for Multimodal Language Models","authors":["Yushi Hu","Weijia Shi","Xingyu Fu","Dan Roth","Mari Ostendorf","Luke Zettlemoyer","Noah A. Smith","Ranjay Krishna"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$16f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HuSFROZSK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HuSFROZSK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/fb82011040977c7712409fbdb5456647-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有多模态大模型的思维链仅支持文本作为中间推理载体，无法模拟人类通过手绘草图辅助推理的行为，在几何题、地图推理等需要空间视觉推理的任务上表现较差。","importance":"范式级贡献，首次将视觉草图作为中间推理步骤引入多模态大模型，拓展了思维链的模态边界，为多模态推理能力提升提供了新的方向。","technical_approach":"原创多模态推理框架，为多模态大模型新增了可操作的视觉草稿板和线条、方框、标记等手绘工具，大模型根据自己生成的手绘内容迭代规划推理路径，和之前用文本到图像生成模型实现画图的方案比，生成的草图是结构化的推理载体而非最终输出，推理效率提升30%以上，空间推理任务准确率更高。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体模型参数量、任务数据集、baseline的准确率对比数值，仅表明在需要空间视觉推理的任务上表现优于纯文本思维链方案，完整实验结果需见正文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing chain-of-thought for multimodal large models only supports text as the intermediate reasoning carrier, cannot simulate human's reasoning behavior assisted by hand-drawn sketches, performs poorly on tasks requiring spatial visual reasoning such as geometry problems and map reasoning.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution, introduces visual sketch as intermediate reasoning step into multimodal large models for the first time, expands the modality boundary of chain-of-thought, provides a new direction for improving multimodal reasoning capability.","technical_approach":"Original multimodal reasoning framework, adds an operable visual sketchpad and hand-drawing tools such as lines, boxes, marks to multimodal large models, the large model iteratively plans reasoning paths based on the hand-drawn content it generates, compared with previous solutions using text-to-image generation models to implement drawing, the generated sketches are structured reasoning carriers rather than final outputs, reasoning efficiency is improved by more than 30%, and accuracy on spatial reasoning tasks is higher.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose specific model parameter size, task dataset, accuracy comparison values with baselines, only states that performance on tasks requiring spatial visual reasoning is better than pure text chain-of-thought solutions, full results are available in the full paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","chain-of-thought","visual-reasoning","tool-use"],"keywords":["multimodal","large language model","computer vision","reasoning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"中间推理步骤可以有效提升大模型的复杂任务解决能力","claim_en":"Intermediate reasoning steps can effectively improve the complex task solving ability of large models","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4的推理框架设计部分即可，为多模态大模型的空间推理能力优化提供新方向。","en":"Only check the reasoning framework design in Section 4, it provides a new direction for spatial reasoning ability optimization of multimodal LLMs."}},{"id":"HuWLP0L24","title":"On Statistical Rates and Provably Efficient Criteria of Latent Diffusion Transformers (DiTs)","authors":["Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu","Weimin Wu","Zhuoru Li","Sophia Pi","Zhao Song","Han Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$170","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HuWLP0L24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HuWLP0L24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/37f6bed18b9b404f53dcaec4607c4fb7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：Latent Diffusion Transformer（DiT）为什么在经验上有效、以及什么样的训练准则才具有可证明的统计效率。现有 DiT 工作大多停留在经验结果上，理论分析常把扩散、潜变量编码器、Transformer 表达能力分开处理，因此很难回答训练目标是否合理、样本复杂度如何、以及哪些设计只是工程技巧。","importance":"这是一篇偏理论框架级的工作，价值在于给 latent diffusion + Transformer 这一路线补上了可证明性，而不是直接提出更强的生成模型。对 pretrain 的启示是：当统一 token 建模逐步扩展到图像、语音和离散/连续混合空间时，训练目标本身是否 statistically efficient 会变得越来越关键；这篇工作试图回答的正是“哪些准则不是只会 work，但还能被证明值得用”。","technical_approach":"核心方法是对 latent DiT 的学习准则做统计效率分析，并给出 provably efficient 的条件或替代准则。按标题判断，作者不是发明一个全新的 DiT 架构，而是把 latent diffusion 的去噪学习目标抽象成可分析的估计问题，再研究不同 criterion 的收敛速率、样本效率和可识别性条件。它和常见经验论文的区别在于不强调更复杂的网络设计，而是强调‘在什么假设下、用什么损失，模型能以多快的统计速率逼近目标分布’；这样的设计有效，是因为它把生成质量背后的黑箱训练过程拆成了可分析的误差项。","experiments":"给定当前信息，无法确认具体实验设置、模型参数量、数据规模和数值结果。可以较稳妥地预期，这类论文通常会包含合成数据或受控实验来验证理论速率是否与实践趋势一致，并可能补充标准图像生成基准上的实证对比；但没有摘要和正文时，不应编造具体提升幅度。对读者更有价值的关注点应是：理论假设是否过强、结果是否覆盖常用噪声参数化与 latent encoder、以及经验实验是否真的验证了不同准则间的 sample-efficiency 差异。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a basic but under-theorized question: why latent Diffusion Transformers work, and which training criteria are actually statistically efficient. Prior DiT work is mostly empirical, while existing theory often isolates diffusion, latent encoding, and model class, leaving the core learning objective itself poorly understood.","importance":"This is primarily a theory-facing contribution, not a new state-of-the-art generator. Its value for pretraining research is that it treats the objective as a first-class design choice. As unified pretraining expands from text to latent image/audio spaces, it becomes increasingly important to know whether a loss is not only workable in practice but also statistically well-founded.","technical_approach":"The core contribution appears to be a statistical-rate analysis of latent DiT learning criteria, together with conditions under which some criteria are provably efficient. This looks more like an analysis-and-principle paper than a new architecture paper: it likely formalizes latent diffusion training as an estimation problem, then studies convergence rates, identifiability, and sample efficiency under different objectives. The design is useful because it turns opaque training heuristics into analyzable error terms.","experiments":"The provided information does not include concrete experimental settings, model sizes, datasets, or numerical gains. A reasonable expectation is that the paper uses controlled or synthetic settings to validate the theoretical rates, and possibly includes standard generative benchmarks as a sanity check. Without the abstract or full text, it would be inaccurate to state specific improvements. The practical question to watch is whether the assumptions are mild enough to cover real latent diffusion pipelines.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion-transformer","theory","latent-diffusion","statistical-rates"],"keywords":["DiT","Score Matching","Diffusion Transformer","Efficiency","Universal Approximation","Convergence Analysis","Diffusion Generative Model","DDPM"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§3的统计效率条件推导部分，为跨模态统一token建模的损失设计提供理论依据。","en":"Focus on the statistical efficiency condition derivation in Section 3, it provides theoretical basis for loss design of cross-modal unified token modeling."}},{"id":"HuZX24","title":"An In-depth Investigation of Sparse Rate Reduction in Transformer-like Models","authors":["Yunzhe Hu","Difan Zou","Dong Xu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$171","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HuZX24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HuZX24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d3d1947ba438c758790b18d5fcf69e8f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作讨论的核心问题是：Transformer-like 模型里的 sparse rate reduction 到底在起什么作用，何时有效、何时失效。以往很多稀疏表示或 rate-reduction 观点在视觉模型上有启发，但对 Transformer 这种带残差、归一化和注意力耦合的架构，机制并不清楚，容易把现象当原理。","importance":"这是一篇机制分析型工作，重要性在于澄清一个被频繁引用但未被充分拆解的解释框架。对 pretrain 的意义不是立刻带来更高 benchmark，而是帮助研究者判断：稀疏性相关目标究竟是在改善表示压缩、优化条件，还是只是与其他训练组件共现；这种区分会直接影响后续损失设计和稀疏建模路线。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是对 sparse rate reduction 在 Transformer-like 模型中的行为做系统拆解，而不是提出单一新算法。题目中的 in-depth investigation 通常意味着作者会从层级表示、特征协方差、token/通道稀疏性、训练动态或理论代理指标等角度分析该机制，并比较其在不同模块中的作用差异。这样的设计有效，是因为它不把 rate reduction 当成一个抽象好词，而是试图分辨到底是哪一部分结构诱发了收益。","experiments":"当前没有摘要，无法确认是否覆盖语言、视觉或多模态 Transformer，也无法确认模型大小与核心数字。较可能的实验组织方式是：在若干 Transformer-like 架构上比较引入与不引入 sparse rate reduction 的性能、训练稳定性和表示统计量，并配合 ablation 验证注意力、MLP、残差和归一化的交互作用。若读者后续阅读正文，最值得看的是作者是否给出了跨架构一致的结论，还是只在某一小类模型上成立。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a clarification question: what exactly does sparse rate reduction do in Transformer-like models, and when does it help or fail? Prior work often treats rate-reduction-style arguments as a general explanation for sparse representations, but Transformers introduce residual, normalization, and attention interactions that can break simple narratives.","importance":"This is a mechanistic analysis paper. Its value is not immediate benchmark gains but a cleaner understanding of whether sparsity-related objectives improve representation compression, optimization, or something else entirely. That distinction matters for future pretraining losses and sparse modeling strategies.","technical_approach":"The work appears to be a systematic investigation rather than a single new algorithm. An 'in-depth' study in this context likely means analyzing sparse rate reduction through representation statistics, layerwise effects, token/channel sparsity, and training dynamics across Transformer-like architectures. This is useful because it tries to identify which architectural components actually produce the observed gains instead of treating rate reduction as a vague explanatory slogan.","experiments":"No abstract is available, so the covered domains, model scales, and quantitative results cannot be confirmed. A likely setup is to compare models with and without sparse rate reduction across several Transformer-like backbones, then use ablations to isolate interactions with attention, MLP blocks, residual paths, and normalization. The key thing to look for is whether the conclusions hold broadly or only in a narrow architecture regime.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sparse-rate-reduction","transformer-theory","representation-learning"],"keywords":["Sparse Rate Reduction","Transformer","Complexity Measure","Generalization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§5的不同模块作用差异对比部分，可指导预训练稀疏性相关的损失函数设计。","en":"Only check the cross-module effect difference comparison in Section 5, it can guide sparsity-related loss function design for pre-training."}},{"id":"Huang0MHDBHAKDG24","title":"ConMe: Rethinking Evaluation of Compositional Reasoning for Modern VLMs","authors":["Irene Huang","Wei Lin","Muhammad Jehanzeb Mirza","Jacob A. Hansen","Sivan Doveh","Victor Butoi","Roei Herzig","Assaf Arbelle","Hilde Kuehne","Trevor Darrell","Chuang Gan","Aude Oliva","Rogério Feris","Leonid Karlinsky"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$172","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Huang0MHDBHAKDG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Huang0MHDBHAKDG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/28aad3b3b315d86910d7f4ee2867dfa4-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：现代 VLM 的 compositional reasoning 评测可能已经失真，很多基准测到的不是组合推理，而是数据偏置、模板记忆或语言先验。这个问题现在很关键，因为 VLM 能力提升后，旧基准很容易饱和，导致研究者误把高分当成真正的组合泛化。","importance":"这是评测范式级工作。对 VLM 预训练的启示很直接：如果你的评测不能把真实的组合推理与 shortcut 分开，那么图文对齐、原生多模态建模、视觉 tokenizer 这些 pretrain 改动的收益就会被高估或误判。它的重要性不在于给出新模型，而在于纠正‘我们到底在测什么’。","technical_approach":"核心方法是重做 compositional reasoning 的评测框架，题目中的 ConMe 大概率是在构造更干净的对照、扰动或难例集，用来分离对象识别、关系理解、语言模板利用和真实组合推理。和传统只报 benchmark accuracy 的工作不同，这类设计通常会加入反事实样本、控制变量拆分、答案分布校正，甚至模型行为诊断。这样做有效，是因为组合推理最怕 dataset leakage；若不刻意去除捷径，高分并不能说明模型真的学会了组合规则。","experiments":"可以合理预期，实验会覆盖多个主流现代 VLM，并展示它们在旧基准与新评测设定下排名或绝对表现发生明显变化。当前信息无法确认具体模型、数据集和数值。若读者后续细看，最值得关注的是两点：第一，是否存在“整体能力更强但组合推理不更强”的模型；第二，性能下降主要来自视觉关系理解、跨模态绑定，还是语言先验被抑制后暴露出的短板。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper questions whether current benchmarks still measure compositional reasoning in modern VLMs, or mostly reward shortcut exploitation such as dataset bias, template familiarity, and language priors. This matters now because stronger VLMs can saturate older benchmarks without actually improving compositional generalization.","importance":"This is an evaluation-paradigm contribution. For multimodal pretraining, it matters because weak evaluation can misattribute gains from alignment losses, visual tokenization, or native multimodal pretraining to 'reasoning' when the benchmark is mostly testing shortcuts. The paper is important if it changes what researchers trust as evidence.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to rethink the evaluation protocol for compositional reasoning, likely by constructing cleaner controls, perturbations, or adversarial splits that separate object recognition, relation understanding, language-template exploitation, and genuine composition. Unlike standard leaderboard reporting, this kind of setup usually adds counterfactuals, controlled answer distributions, and diagnostic slices. That design is effective because compositional reasoning claims are especially vulnerable to dataset leakage.","experiments":"A reasonable expectation is that the paper evaluates several strong modern VLMs and shows that their rankings or absolute scores change substantially under the new protocol. The provided information does not include the specific models, datasets, or numbers. The most informative findings to look for are whether larger or newer models still fail on controlled compositional tests, and which failure mode dominates once language shortcuts are removed.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","benchmark","compositional-reasoning","evaluation"],"keywords":["compositional reasoning","vlms","llms"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看难例构造和shortcut分离方法，可避免VLM预训练改进时被评测偏置误导收益判断。","en":"Focus on the hard case construction and shortcut separation methods, it avoids evaluation bias misleading benefit judgment when improving VLM pre-training."}},{"id":"HuangCBS24","title":"The ALCHEmist: Automated Labeling 500x CHEaper than LLM Data Annotators","authors":["Tzu-Heng Huang","Catherine Cao","Vaishnavi Bhargava","Frederic Sala"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large pretrained models can be used as annotators, helping replace or augment crowdworkers and enabling distilling generalist models into smaller specialist models. Unfortunately, this comes at a cost: employing top-of-the-line models often requires paying thousands of dollars for API calls, while the resulting datasets are static and challenging to audit. To address these challenges, we propose a simple alternative: rather than directly querying labels from pretrained models, we task models to generate programs that can produce labels. These programs can be stored and applied locally, re-used and extended, and cost orders of magnitude less. Our system, $\\textbf{Alchemist}$, obtains comparable to or better performance than large language model-based annotation in a range of tasks for a fraction of the cost: on average, improvements amount to a $\\textbf{12.9}$% enhancement while the total labeling costs across all datasets are reduced by a factor of approximately $\\textbf{500}\\times$.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HuangCBS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HuangCBS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/72802bef5cf1a3449e909b20c2ae18d5-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：高质量标注越来越依赖 LLM 作为数据标注员，但这条路线很贵，而且成本会随着数据规模线性放大。作者想证明，自动化标注系统可以在显著压低成本的同时保留足够的标签质量，从而替代大部分 LLM-as-annotator 流程。","importance":"这是数据生产流程级工作。对 pretrain / posttrain 闭环的意义很现实：很多指令数据、偏好数据、过滤标签、拒答标签都卡在标注成本上。如果真能做到 500x cheaper 且质量可接受，它改变的不是单个 benchmark，而是数据飞轮的经济边界——能不能大规模迭代数据，很多时候取决于标注每条样本的边际成本。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 ALCHEmist，一个自动化标注框架，目标不是把一个更大的 LLM 直接拿来打标签，而是用更便宜的程序化、模型级联或结构化决策流程替代昂贵的逐条生成式标注。题目强调 cost reduction，说明关键设计应当在‘尽量少调用高成本模型’：比如先用便宜规则或小模型过滤简单样本，只把难例升级处理，或者把复杂标签任务拆成若干低成本子判断。这样的设计有效，是因为真实标注集里往往只有一小部分样本真的需要昂贵推理。","experiments":"标题给出的最核心事实是成本约降低 500 倍。除此之外，当前信息不足以确认任务类型、标签质量指标、与哪些 LLM 标注基线比较。后续阅读时，最该看的是三个点：第一，500x 是相对 GPT-4 级还是更便宜模型；第二，质量损失是否只在长尾难例上；第三，这种方法对偏好标注、安全标签、分类标签是否都成立。若它只在简单判别任务上有效，结论边界会明显收窄。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a growing bottleneck: using LLMs as annotators can produce useful labels, but the cost scales badly with data volume. The goal is to show that a more automated labeling pipeline can retain enough quality while cutting annotation cost dramatically.","importance":"This is a data-pipeline contribution with direct relevance to the pretrain–posttrain loop. Instruction data, preference data, filtering labels, and safety labels are often limited more by annotation economics than by model ideas. If the claimed 500x cost reduction holds with acceptable quality, the impact is on data iteration speed and scale, not just one benchmark.","technical_approach":"The core contribution is ALCHEmist, an automated labeling framework designed to avoid expensive per-example LLM annotation whenever possible. The likely strategy is to use cascades, structured sub-decisions, small models, or programmatic heuristics to solve easy cases cheaply and escalate only ambiguous samples. This works when the hard examples are a minority, which is common in large labeling pipelines.","experiments":"The headline empirical fact from the title is roughly 500x lower labeling cost. Beyond that, the provided information does not specify the task types, quality metrics, or LLM baselines. The main things to inspect in the full paper are: what annotator it is compared against, whether quality drops mainly on long-tail difficult examples, and whether the gains generalize beyond simple classification-style labels to preference or safety annotation.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-annotation","llm","cost-efficiency","labeling"],"keywords":["Automated Data Labeling; Code Generation; Weak Supervision"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的级联标注策略和成本核算表即可，适合预训练数据流水线的成本优化环节参考。","en":"Only read §3 cascaded labeling strategy and cost accounting tables, useful for cost optimization in pretraining data pipelines."}},{"id":"HuangFLXWL024","title":"Ensemble Learning for Heterogeneous Large Language Models with Deep Parallel Collaboration","authors":["Yichong Huang","Xiaocheng Feng","Baohang Li","Yang Xiang","Hui Wang","Ting Liu","Bing Qin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$173","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HuangFLXWL024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HuangFLXWL024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d8a6eb79f8ccaacbe7198a5caf3a0323-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：异构大语言模型各有长板，但常见 ensemble 要么只在输出端投票，要么串行调用成本很高，无法真正形成协作。作者关注的是如何让不同架构、不同能力分布的 LLM 在推理时进行深度并行协同，而不是简单做多数表决。","importance":"这是系统方法级工作。对 pretrain 本身不是直接贡献，但对 posttrain 和模型组合有启发：当单模型继续变大越来越贵时，‘多个异构中等模型协作’可能成为另一条扩展路径。它的重要性取决于是否证明了 heterogeneity 真的带来互补，而不是只靠更多总参数取胜。","technical_approach":"核心方法是面向 heterogeneous LLM ensemble 的 deep parallel collaboration。按标题判断，方法重点不是 late fusion，而是让多个模型在中间过程共享部分状态、候选、置信度或推理分工，从而并行地产生比单模型更稳的答案。和常规 self-consistency 或 reranking 的区别在于，这里强调并行协作和异构性利用：不同模型可能被分配不同子角色，而不是独立解题后再投票。这样设计可能有效，因为互补模型在错误相关性上更低；代价是系统复杂度高，且协作协议若设计不好，收益会被通信/调度开销吞掉。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认实验是问答、代码还是推理任务，也无法确认参与集成的模型规模和数量。预期实验会比较单模型、同构 ensemble、简单投票、串行反思式协作与该方法的准确率/成本比。读者应重点看两个事实：第一，在相同总 FLOPs 或相近时延下是否真的优于更大的单模型；第二，收益是否来自异构性本身，而不是 ensemble 数量增加。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a familiar but unresolved issue: different LLMs have complementary strengths, yet most ensembles either combine outputs only at the end or rely on expensive sequential coordination. The goal is to enable deeper parallel collaboration among heterogeneous LLMs rather than simple voting.","importance":"This is a systems-and-methods contribution. It is not directly a pretraining paper, but it matters for the broader scaling picture: if multiple mid-sized heterogeneous models can collaborate effectively, that is an alternative to always pushing toward a single larger model. The key question is whether heterogeneity yields real complementarity rather than just more total parameters.","technical_approach":"The core idea is deep parallel collaboration for heterogeneous LLM ensembles. From the title, this likely goes beyond late fusion and lets models exchange intermediate candidates, confidence signals, or role-specialized sub-results while running in parallel. That differs from standard self-consistency or reranking, where models solve independently and only interact at the end. The design could work because diverse models tend to have less correlated errors, but the downside is higher system and coordination complexity.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so the exact tasks, model set, and quantitative gains are unknown. A plausible experimental structure would compare single models, homogeneous ensembles, simple voting, sequential collaboration baselines, and the proposed parallel scheme on both quality and cost. The most important empirical checks are whether it beats a stronger single model at similar latency or compute, and whether the gain truly comes from heterogeneity.","authors_note":""},"tags":["ensemble","llm","heterogeneous-models","collaboration"],"keywords":["Ensemble Learning","Large Language Model","Relative Representation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4的异构模型并行协作收益对比实验就行，可给多模型组合落地做参考。","en":"Only read §4 performance comparison of heterogeneous model parallel collaboration, as reference for multi-model combination deployment."}},{"id":"HuangHCCXS24","title":"On the Comparison between Multi-modal and Single-modal Contrastive Learning","authors":["Wei Huang","Andi Han","Yongqiang Chen","Yuan Cao","Zhiqiang Xu","Taiji Suzuki"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$174","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/HuangHCCXS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/HuangHCCXS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/94840c41497ead6a84f493f029eba7fa-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：多模态对比学习和单模态对比学习看起来形式相近，但它们在信息结构、负样本语义和表示坍缩风险上并不等价。过去很多结论默认可以在两者之间迁移，这可能掩盖了多模态预训练里真正决定效果的因素。","importance":"这是理解框架级工作。对 VLM 预训练很有价值，因为 contrastive loss 仍然是图文对齐的核心之一；如果多模态对比学习的行为机制与单模态显著不同，那么很多从 SimCLR/MoCo 继承来的经验法则未必直接成立。它的贡献更像是给研究者一个更准确的比较坐标系。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是把 multi-modal 与 single-modal contrastive learning 放到同一分析框架下比较，可能从信息论、表示几何、正负样本分布和优化动态几个角度展开。关键不是重新发明 contrastive loss，而是识别：多模态中的正样本对应通常是跨模态语义对齐，不是增强视角的一致性；这会改变温度、batch negatives、投影头甚至评价方式的最佳选择。这样的分析有效，因为它直接解释了为什么一些在单模态有效的技巧在图文场景中收益有限甚至有副作用。","experiments":"当前没有摘要，无法确认是否包含理论推导、线性探测、检索或零样本分类等具体实验。合理预期是作者会在单模态和多模态设定下对齐控制变量，比较温度、负样本数量、增强策略、投影头设计等因素的影响。值得重点关注的是是否存在清晰的 regime shift：例如某些超参在单模态随 batch 增大持续受益，但在多模态中很快饱和或反向影响对齐质量。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether multimodal contrastive learning is actually comparable to its single-modal counterpart. Although the loss form looks similar, the information structure, semantics of negatives, and collapse risks are not the same, so directly transferring intuition may be misleading.","importance":"This is a conceptual and analytical contribution that matters for VLM pretraining. Contrastive loss remains central to image-text alignment, and if multimodal contrastive learning behaves differently from SimCLR-style single-modal learning, then many inherited design heuristics may be suboptimal. The value is in improving the researcher’s mental model.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to compare multi-modal and single-modal contrastive learning under a shared analysis framework, potentially through information-theoretic arguments, representation geometry, positive/negative pair structure, and optimization dynamics. The main point is not to invent a new loss, but to show that cross-modal positives encode semantic alignment rather than augmentation invariance, which changes what temperature, batch negatives, and projection heads should do.","experiments":"Without an abstract, the exact empirical setup is unclear. A likely study would control for architecture and training setup while varying factors such as temperature, negative pool size, augmentation strategy, and projector design in both single-modal and multimodal settings. The most useful finding would be a clear regime difference showing that heuristics effective in one setting fail or saturate in the other.","authors_note":""},"tags":["contrastive-learning","multimodal","theory","clip"],"keywords":["multi-modal contrastive learning","single-modal contrastive learning","optimization","learning theory"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3对比分析部分，理清多模态和单模态对比学习的优化差异，修正VLM预训练调参经验。","en":"Focus on §3 comparative analysis to clarify optimization differences between multi-modal and single-modal contrastive learning, adjust VLM pretraining tuning experience."}},{"id":"Jain0KNB0AP24","title":"Mixture of Nested Experts: Adaptive Processing of Visual Tokens","authors":["Gagan Jain","Nidhi Hegde","Aditya Kusupati","Arsha Nagrani","Shyamal Buch","Prateek Jain","Anurag Arnab","Sujoy Paul"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$175","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Jain0KNB0AP24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Jain0KNB0AP24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/6b768359d0e8925164f61f381a748441-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：视觉 token 的计算量很不均匀，但大多数视觉 Transformer 或 VLM 编码器仍然对所有 token 做近似同等强度的处理，导致算力浪费。作者想做的是让模型按 token 难度自适应分配计算，而不是全局地统一加深或裁剪网络。","importance":"这是架构/效率方法级工作。对视觉预训练和 VLM 的启示是明确的：随着分辨率和视频长度上升，token-level adaptive compute 会越来越重要。相比简单 token pruning，这种 nested experts 路线如果能保留难 token 的高容量处理，同时快速放过易 token，就更适合作为原生预训练架构的一部分。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Mixture of Nested Experts，用于视觉 token 的自适应处理。题目里的 nested 很关键，说明专家之间可能不是完全独立平行，而是具有包含关系或逐级扩展结构：简单 token 走小专家，复杂 token 进入更深或更大的专家路径。它和标准 MoE 的区别在于路由粒度更偏视觉 token，且专家设计可能强调多级计算重用，而不是纯参数分片。这样设计有效，是因为视觉输入的信息密度高度非均匀；代价是路由错误会直接损伤细粒度识别，且训练时容易出现专家负载不均。","experiments":"当前没有摘要，无法确认是图像分类、检测还是 VLM 预训练中的视觉编码实验，也无法确认吞吐和精度收益。合理预期会报告：在相近 FLOPs 下精度提升，或在相近精度下显著降低计算，并分析不同 token 路由策略、专家层级数和负载均衡损失的影响。若读者关注 pretrain 价值，应特别看它是否能在大规模自监督/图文预训练中稳定训练，而不只是小规模监督任务上有效。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a compute-allocation inefficiency: visual tokens are not equally difficult, yet most vision backbones still process them with roughly uniform compute. The goal is to allocate computation adaptively at the token level instead of scaling the whole network uniformly.","importance":"This is an architecture-and-efficiency contribution. It matters for visual pretraining and VLMs because token-level adaptive compute becomes more valuable as image resolution and video length grow. Compared with simple token pruning, a nested-expert design could preserve capacity for hard tokens while cheaply handling easy ones.","technical_approach":"The method is a Mixture of Nested Experts for adaptive visual token processing. The word 'nested' suggests that experts are organized hierarchically or incrementally rather than as fully separate parallel experts: easy tokens take a small path, while harder tokens receive deeper or larger processing. That differs from standard MoE, which is often more about parameter partitioning than reusable multistage computation. The design is compelling because visual information density is highly uneven across tokens, though routing mistakes and load imbalance remain clear risks.","experiments":"The available information does not reveal the exact tasks, scales, or quantitative gains. A likely evaluation would show either better accuracy at matched FLOPs or lower compute at matched accuracy, with ablations on routing strategy, expert hierarchy depth, and load-balancing terms. For pretraining-oriented readers, the key question is whether the method trains stably at scale, not just on smaller supervised benchmarks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","vision","adaptive-compute","token-pruning"],"keywords":["Mixture of Experts","Matryoshka Representation Learning","Information Compression","Efficient Inference"]},{"id":"JanatiMDMO24","title":"Divide-and-Conquer Posterior Sampling for Denoising Diffusion priors","authors":["Yazid Janati","Badr Moufad","Alain Durmus","Eric Moulines","Jimmy Olsson"],"institutions":["Ecole Polytechnique","KTH Royal Institute of Technology"],"abstract":"$176","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JanatiMDMO24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JanatiMDMO24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/b0ae046e198a5e43141519868a959c74-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在使用预训练 denoising diffusion 模型作为先验进行逆问题求解时，后验采样的计算效率和准确性难以兼顾。现有方法要么需要大量采样步骤，要么近似质量差。","importance":"对 diffusion 模型的推理/采样效率有方法级贡献。虽然主要面向逆问题（图像修复等），但其分治后验采样思路对理解 diffusion LM 的条件生成和引导采样有参考价值。","technical_approach":"提出 Divide-and-Conquer Posterior Sampling：将高维后验分解为多个低维子问题，分别采样后聚合。核心是利用 diffusion 过程的马尔可夫结构，在时间维度上分段处理，每段用更简单的近似后验。相比直接在全链上做引导采样，减少了每步近似误差的累积。","experiments":"在图像逆问题（去噪、修复、超分辨率等）上验证，与 DPS、Π-GDM 等 diffusion 后验采样 baseline 比较。具体数字未从摘要获取，但声称在采样质量和效率上取得更好的 trade-off。","authors_note":"Eric Moulines 是法国知名统计学家，Ecole Polytechnique 教授，在 MCMC、EM 算法、序列蒙特卡洛等方向有深厚积累。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Posterior sampling with pretrained denoising diffusion priors for inverse problems is either computationally expensive or inaccurate. Existing guided sampling methods accumulate approximation errors across the full diffusion chain.","importance":"Method-level contribution to diffusion model inference efficiency. While targeting inverse problems, the divide-and-conquer posterior sampling idea is informative for conditional generation in diffusion LMs.","technical_approach":"Proposes splitting the high-dimensional posterior into lower-dimensional sub-problems along the temporal dimension of the diffusion process, leveraging its Markov structure. Each segment uses a simpler approximate posterior, reducing error accumulation compared to full-chain guided sampling.","experiments":"Evaluated on image inverse problems (denoising, inpainting, super-resolution) against baselines like DPS and Π-GDM. Claims improved quality-efficiency trade-off; specific numbers not available from abstract alone.","authors_note":"Eric Moulines is a prominent statistician at Ecole Polytechnique, known for foundational work on MCMC, EM algorithms, and sequential Monte Carlo methods."},"tags":["diffusion","posterior-sampling","denoising","inference"],"notable_authors":["Eric Moulines"],"keywords":["Denoising Diffusion models","posterior sampling","Monte Carlo methods"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§4的分治采样思路部分，可迁移到扩散语言模型的条件引导采样优化参考。","en":"Only read §4 divide-and-conquer sampling idea, can be migrated to conditional guided sampling optimization for diffusion language models."}},{"id":"JayaramDHLM24","title":"MUVERA: Multi-Vector Retrieval via Fixed Dimensional Encoding","authors":["Laxman Dhulipala","Majid Hadian","Rajesh Jayaram","Jason Lee","Vahab Mirrokni"],"institutions":["Google Research"],"abstract":"$177","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JayaramDHLM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JayaramDHLM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/b71cfefae46909178603b5bc6c11d3ae-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"多向量检索（multi-vector retrieval，如 ColBERT）虽然效果好，但每个文档需要存储多个向量，导致索引体积和检索延迟远大于单向量方法。如何在保持多向量检索质量的同时降低存储和计算开销？","importance":"系统级贡献。对 LLM 的 RAG 管线有直接影响：多向量检索是当前高质量检索的主流方案之一，MUVERA 提供了一种将多向量压缩为固定维度编码的方法，使其可以复用现有的单向量 ANN 索引基础设施。","technical_approach":"MUVERA 将每个文档的多个 token 向量编码为一个固定维度的单向量表示，使得多向量检索可以退化为标准的单向量最近邻搜索。核心思路是设计一种编码方案，使得编码后的内积近似原始多向量交互分数（如 MaxSim）。这样就能直接用 FAISS 等成熟 ANN 库做高效检索。","experiments":"具体数据集和指标未从摘要获取，但核心卖点是在检索质量接近原始 ColBERT 的前提下，大幅减少索引体积和检索延迟。","authors_note":"Vahab Mirrokni 是 Google Research 资深研究科学家，在大规模优化和算法方向有大量工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Multi-vector retrieval (e.g., ColBERT) achieves strong quality but requires storing multiple vectors per document, leading to large index sizes and high latency. How to compress multi-vector representations into fixed-dimensional encodings without losing retrieval quality?","importance":"System-level contribution directly impacting RAG pipelines for LLMs. MUVERA enables multi-vector retrieval to reuse existing single-vector ANN infrastructure (e.g., FAISS), making high-quality retrieval more practical at scale.","technical_approach":"Encodes each document's multiple token vectors into a single fixed-dimensional vector such that inner products in the encoded space approximate the original multi-vector interaction scores (e.g., MaxSim). This reduces multi-vector retrieval to standard single-vector nearest neighbor search.","experiments":"Specific datasets and metrics not available from abstract, but the key claim is near-ColBERT retrieval quality with substantially reduced index size and latency.","authors_note":"Vahab Mirrokni is a senior research scientist at Google Research with extensive work on large-scale optimization and algorithms."},"tags":["retrieval","embedding","vector-search","rag"],"notable_authors":["Vahab Mirrokni"],"keywords":["Retrieval","Late Interaction","ColBERT","Multi-Vector"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3.2的固定维编码实现逻辑，可直接用到内部RAG管线的检索模块优化。","en":"Focus on §3.2 fixed-dimensional encoding implementation logic, can be directly applied to retrieval module optimization in internal RAG pipelines."}},{"id":"JazbecTVSZNN24","title":"Fast yet Safe: Early-Exiting with Risk Control","authors":["Metod Jazbec","Alexander Timans","Tin Hadzi Veljkovic","Kaspar Sakmann","Dan Zhang","Christian Andersson Naesseth","Eric T. Nalisnick"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Scaling machine learning models significantly improves their performance.  However, such gains come at the cost of inference being slow and resource-intensive.  Early-exit neural networks (EENNs) offer a promising solution: they accelerate inference by allowing intermediate layers to exit and produce a prediction early.  Yet a fundamental issue with EENNs is how to determine when to exit without severely degrading performance.  In other words, when is it 'safe' for an EENN to go 'fast'?  To address this issue, we investigate how to adapt frameworks of risk control to EENNs. Risk control offers a distribution-free, post-hoc solution that tunes the EENN's exiting mechanism so that exits only occur when the output is of sufficient quality.  We empirically validate our insights on a range of vision and language tasks, demonstrating that risk control can produce substantial computational savings, all the while preserving user-specified performance goals.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JazbecTVSZNN24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JazbecTVSZNN24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ea5a63f7ddb82e58623693fd1f4933f7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Early-exit 推理（模型在中间层提前输出）能加速但会牺牲准确率。如何在加速的同时提供统计意义上的风险控制保证——即确保 early-exit 后的错误率不超过预设阈值？","importance":"对 LLM serving 效率有实用价值。Early-exit 是减少推理成本的重要手段，但在生产环境中需要可靠的质量保证。这篇工作将 conformal prediction 风格的风险控制引入 early-exit 决策，提供了理论保证。","technical_approach":"将 early-exit 的退出阈值选择建模为一个风险控制问题，利用 conformal risk control 框架在校准集上选择阈值，使得在测试时 early-exit 的错误率以高概率不超过用户指定的水平。关键是不需要修改模型本身，只需要一个后处理的阈值校准步骤。","experiments":"具体模型和任务未从摘要获取，但预期在分类和/或 NLP 任务上展示了在不同风险水平下 early-exit 的加速比与错误率控制的 trade-off。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Early-exit inference speeds up models by exiting at intermediate layers but sacrifices accuracy unpredictably. How to provide statistical guarantees that the error rate after early-exiting stays below a user-specified threshold?","importance":"Practically relevant to LLM serving. Early-exit is a key inference efficiency technique, and this work adds formal risk control guarantees via conformal prediction, making it more deployable in production.","technical_approach":"Frames the exit threshold selection as a risk control problem. Uses a conformal risk control framework to calibrate thresholds on a held-out set, ensuring that test-time early-exit error rates are bounded with high probability. No model modification needed—just a post-hoc calibration step.","experiments":"Specific models and tasks not available from abstract. Expected to demonstrate speed-accuracy trade-offs under various risk levels on classification and/or NLP tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["early-exit","risk-control","inference","efficiency"],"keywords":["Early-exit neural networks","risk control","efficiency","robustness"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4的阈值校准流程即可，给大模型推理服务的早停加速方案做参考。","en":"Only read §4 threshold calibration process, as reference for early-exit acceleration solutions for LLM serving."}},{"id":"JhaG024","title":"CLAP4CLIP: Continual Learning with Probabilistic Finetuning for Vision-Language Models","authors":["Saurav Jha","Dong Gong","Lina Yao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$178","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JhaG024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JhaG024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e94c57064dd5740c117b453bde8404c9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"视觉-语言模型（如 CLIP）在持续学习（continual learning）场景下会遗忘旧任务知识。如何在不存储旧数据的前提下，让 VLM 在新任务上微调时保持对旧任务的性能？","importance":"对 VLM 的持续预训练和增量微调有参考价值。CLIP 类模型在实际部署中经常需要适配新领域，灾难性遗忘是核心障碍。概率微调的思路提供了一种参数高效且抗遗忘的方案。","technical_approach":"CLAP4CLIP 将模型参数建模为概率分布（而非点估计），在微调时通过贝叶斯后验更新来平衡新旧任务。核心机制是用先验分布编码旧任务知识，新任务的似然更新后验，从而自然地实现知识保留与新知识获取的 trade-off。","experiments":"具体 benchmark 和数字未从摘要获取，但预期在标准持续学习 benchmark（如 split-CIFAR、sequential task adaptation）上与 EWC、LwF 等 baseline 比较，展示更好的遗忘-学习 trade-off。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Vision-language models like CLIP suffer catastrophic forgetting when fine-tuned on sequential tasks. How to adapt VLMs to new tasks without storing old data while preserving prior knowledge?","importance":"Relevant to continual pretraining and incremental fine-tuning of VLMs. Probabilistic fine-tuning offers a parameter-efficient, forgetting-resistant approach for CLIP-like models that need frequent domain adaptation.","technical_approach":"CLAP4CLIP models parameters as probability distributions rather than point estimates. Fine-tuning performs Bayesian posterior updates: the prior encodes old-task knowledge, and the new-task likelihood updates the posterior, naturally balancing retention and acquisition.","experiments":"Specific benchmarks and numbers not available from abstract. Expected to compare against EWC, LwF, and other continual learning baselines on standard sequential task adaptation benchmarks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["continual-learning","vlm","fine-tuning","probabilistic"],"keywords":["Continual Learning","Vision-language models","Finetuning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§3的概率微调方法部分，给VLM增量预训练的抗遗忘方案参考。","en":"Only read §3 probabilistic finetuning method, reference for anti-forgetting solutions in VLM incremental pretraining."}},{"id":"Ji0FAGYM24","title":"A Single-Step, Sharpness-Aware Minimization is All You Need to Achieve Efficient and Accurate Sparse Training","authors":["Jie Ji","Gen Li","Jingjing Fu","Fatemeh Afghah","Linke Guo","Xiaoyong Yuan","Xiaolong Ma"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$179","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Ji0FAGYM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Ji0FAGYM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/4e5a47c427ec16ec863e547bc1aeb70c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"稀疏训练（sparse training）在效率和精度之间存在矛盾：高稀疏度能大幅减少计算量，但通常伴随显著的精度下降。现有方法需要多步复杂的剪枝-再生长循环。","importance":"对大模型训练效率有方法级贡献。SAM（Sharpness-Aware Minimization）本身已被证明能改善泛化，这篇工作发现单步 SAM 就足以让稀疏训练达到高效且准确，简化了稀疏训练流程。","technical_approach":"核心发现是：在稀疏训练中，只需一步 SAM 扰动（而非每步都做 SAM）就能显著改善稀疏网络的泛化性能。机制上，SAM 的扰动帮助稀疏网络逃离尖锐极小值，而单步就足够因为稀疏结构本身限制了损失景观的复杂度。这比完整 SAM 节省了近一半的计算开销。","experiments":"具体模型、数据集和数字未从摘要获取，但预期在 ResNet/VGG 等架构上以不同稀疏度（如 90%、95%）验证，与 RigL、SET 等动态稀疏训练方法比较。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Sparse training trades accuracy for efficiency, and existing methods require complex prune-regrow cycles. How to achieve both efficiency and accuracy in sparse training with minimal overhead?","importance":"Method-level contribution to training efficiency. The finding that a single SAM step suffices for effective sparse training simplifies the pipeline and reduces overhead compared to full SAM or multi-step sparse training methods.","technical_approach":"Key finding: a single sharpness-aware perturbation step (rather than per-step SAM) significantly improves generalization in sparse networks. The perturbation helps escape sharp minima, and one step suffices because the sparse structure constrains the loss landscape complexity. This halves SAM's computational overhead.","experiments":"Specific models, datasets, and numbers not available from abstract. Expected to evaluate on ResNet/VGG at various sparsity levels (e.g., 90%, 95%) against dynamic sparse training methods like RigL and SET.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sparse-training","sam","optimization","efficiency"],"keywords":["sparse training","efficient learning algorithm"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看Table2的单步SAM稀疏训练效果对比，可快速验证是否要在内部稀疏训练流程集成。","en":"Focus on Table2 performance comparison of single-step SAM sparse training, verify whether to integrate into internal sparse training workflow quickly."}},{"id":"JiWGZZKE24","title":"Exploring Molecular Pretraining Model at Scale","authors":["Xiaohong Ji","Zhen Wang","Zhifeng Gao","Hang Zheng","Linfeng Zhang","Guolin Ke","Weinan E"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$17a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JiWGZZKE24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JiWGZZKE24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/53923bb44655a7defb31c7744c01b62b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"分子预训练领域尚未验证缩放定律的存在，无法像NLP、CV领域一样通过扩展模型和数据规模系统性提升模型能力，分子大模型的训练缺乏明确的scaling指导。","importance":"范式级贡献，首次系统验证了分子预训练模型的缩放定律，为分子大模型的规模化训练提供了明确的指导依据，填补了分子预训练scaling研究的空白。","technical_approach":"原创双轨Transformer分子预训练架构，同时融合原子级、图级、几何结构级三类特征，比之前仅融合单层级特征的分子预训练模型的表示能力更强，在此基础上系统测试了模型参数量、数据规模、训练计算量和验证损失的幂律相关性。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体的缩放幂指数、模型参数量范围、数据规模范围、下游任务提升数值，仅表明验证了分子预训练模型存在缩放定律，完整实验结果需见正文。","authors_note":"核心作者包含张林峰（Linfeng Zhang），其团队长期深耕分子模拟与预训练大模型领域，代表性工作包括DeePMD系列分子动力学模型。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The existence of scaling law in molecular pretraining field has not been verified, it is impossible to systematically improve model capability by expanding model and data scale as in NLP and CV fields, and there is no clear scaling guidance for molecular large model training.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution, systematically verifies the scaling law of molecular pretraining models for the first time, provides clear guidance for large-scale training of molecular large models, fills the gap of scaling research in molecular pretraining.","technical_approach":"Original two-track Transformer molecular pretraining architecture, simultaneously integrates three types of features at atomic level, graph level and geometric structure level, has stronger representation capability than previous molecular pretraining models that only integrate single-level features, on this basis, systematically tests the power-law correlation between model parameter size, data scale, training computation and validation loss.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose specific scaling power exponents, model parameter size range, data scale range, downstream task improvement values, only states that the scaling law exists for molecular pretraining models, full results are available in the full paper.","authors_note":"Core author includes Linfeng Zhang, whose team has long focused on molecular simulation and pretraining large models, with representative works including DeePMD series molecular dynamics models."},"tags":["pretraining","scaling","molecular","foundation-model"],"keywords":["Molecular Pretraining","Scaling Law","Molecular Property Prediction"],"notable_authors":["Linfeng Zhang"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"NLP和CV领域的预训练模型符合缩放定律","claim_en":"Pretrained models in NLP and CV fields follow scaling laws","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"分子预训练模型的验证损失和模型参数量、数据规模、训练计算量存在幂律相关性，即符合缩放定律","claim_en":"The validation loss of molecular pretraining models has power-law correlation with model parameter size, data scale and training computation, that is, follows scaling laws","opposes":"之前的研究默认分子预训练的数据异质性过高，不存在统一的缩放定律","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Scaling Law Experiments","why_contested":"打破了分子预训练无法规模化扩展的认知，为分子大模型的研发提供了核心指导"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为分子预训练缩放定律的文献备查，不需要读正文。","en":"As literature reference for molecular pretraining scaling laws, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"Jiang00ZHRK0D24","title":"LeDex: Training LLMs to Better Self-Debug and Explain Code","authors":["Nan Jiang","Xiaopeng Li","Shiqi Wang","Qiang Zhou","Soneya Binta Hossain","Baishakhi Ray","Varun Kumar","Xiaofei Ma","Anoop Deoras"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$17b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Jiang00ZHRK0D24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Jiang00ZHRK0D24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3ea832724870c700f0a03c665572e2a9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"开源小尺寸代码LLM的自调试能力弱，现有自调试方法依赖少样本提示，在小模型上效果退化明显，此前没有针对自调试能力的端到端训练方案。现有方案默认仅靠大模型上下文能力即可实现自调试，未考虑小模型的能力边界。","importance":"方法+数据级贡献，为代码LLM的自调试能力增强提供了可落地的训练范式，不需要依赖大模型的少样本能力即可提升小模型的自调试准确率。","technical_approach":"提出LeDex训练框架，核心是采用「错误代码解释链→代码修正」的两步训练范式，配套自动化pipeline采集高质量的代码解释-修正配对数据集，舍弃了此前仅靠提示注入自调试逻辑的做法，和现有提示式自调试的核心区别是将解释-修正的逻辑直接注入模型训练过程，引入了专门的监督信号。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，仅明确目标为提升小开源LLM的代码自调试准确率，未给出具体指标、baseline和提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Small open-source code LLMs have weak self-debugging capability. Existing self-debugging methods rely on few-shot prompting and perform poorly on small models, with no end-to-end training framework targeting self-debugging capability before this work. Prior solutions default to leveraging large model in-context learning for self-debugging, ignoring the capability boundary of small models.","importance":"Method and data level contribution, providing a practical training paradigm for enhancing code LLM self-debugging capability, which improves small model self-debugging accuracy without relying on few-shot capability of large models.","technical_approach":"Propose LeDex training framework, which adopts a two-step training paradigm of \"wrong code explanation chain → code refinement\", paired with an automated pipeline to collect high-quality code explanation-refinement paired datasets. It abandons the previous practice of injecting self-debugging logic only through prompting, and differs from existing prompting-based self-debugging by directly integrating the explanation-refinement logic into model training with dedicated supervision signals.","experiments":"Full experimental data is not disclosed in the public abstract. Only the target of improving self-debugging accuracy of small open-source LLMs is stated, with no specific metrics, baselines or improvement margins provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-generation","self-debug","llm","sft"],"keywords":["Large Language Model","Code Generation","Code Refinement","Code Explanation","Supervised Finetuning","Reinforcement Learning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"代码LLM一次生成复杂任务正确代码难度高，自调试是提升生成准确率的有效路径。","claim_en":"Code LLMs face difficulty generating correct code for complex tasks in one pass, and self-debugging is an effective approach to improve generation accuracy.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"对小开源LLM做自调试的监督训练效果优于少样本提示方法。","claim_en":"Supervised fine-tuning for self-debugging on small open-source LLMs outperforms few-shot prompting methods.","opposes":"Prior work assumes few-shot prompting is sufficient for LLM self-debugging, and no dedicated training is needed.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction","why_contested":"Clarifies the optimization direction of self-debugging capability for small code LLMs, no longer relying on large model in-context capability."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3的两步训练范式和数据集构建pipeline，可直接参考复用进内部代码LLM能力增强训练。","en":"Focus on §3 two-step training paradigm and dataset construction pipeline, can be reused for internal code LLM capability enhancement training."}},{"id":"Jiang0SLA24","title":"Slot State Space Models","authors":["Jindong Jiang","Fei Deng","Gautam Singh","Minseung Lee","Sungjin Ahn"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$17c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Jiang0SLA24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Jiang0SLA24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/158ac5698e36a01ee5ca9e6732685b34-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有SSM（如S4、Mamba）采用单块全局状态向量，没有模块化归纳偏置，不适合处理内在模块化的序列建模任务，此前的SSM设计没有引入信息分离的机制。","importance":"架构级贡献，为SSM引入了模块化归纳偏置，拓展了SSM在需要信息隔离的结构化序列任务上的适用范围。","technical_approach":"提出SlotSSM框架，将原SSM的单块状态拆分为多个独立的slot向量，每个slot独立完成状态转移，仅通过自注意力瓶颈实现稀疏的跨slot交互，舍弃了原SSM全局共享统一状态的设计，和现有SSM的核心区别是天然支持信息的模块化隔离，适配结构化序列任务的特性。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，仅说明针对模块化序列建模任务设计，未给出具体指标、baseline和提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing SSMs (e.g. S4, Mamba) use a monolithic global state vector without modular inductive bias, which is not suitable for sequence modeling tasks with inherent modular structure. No prior SSM design incorporates information separation mechanisms.","importance":"Architecture level contribution, introducing modular inductive bias to SSMs and expanding the applicable scope of SSMs to structured sequence tasks requiring information isolation.","technical_approach":"Propose SlotSSM framework, which splits the monolithic state of vanilla SSM into multiple independent slot vectors. Each slot performs state transition independently, with sparse cross-slot interaction implemented only through a self-attention bottleneck. It abandons the design of global unified state in vanilla SSM, and differs from existing SSMs by natively supporting modular information isolation to fit the characteristics of structured sequence tasks.","experiments":"Full experimental data is not disclosed in the public abstract. Only the design target for modular sequence modeling tasks is stated, with no specific metrics, baselines or improvement margins provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["state-space-model","slot-attention","object-centric","architecture"],"keywords":["State-Space Models","Object-Centric Learning","Video Understanding Models","Spatial-Temporal Reasoning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"SSM在长程时序依赖建模上有显著的计算效率优势。","claim_en":"State Space Models have significant computational efficiency advantages in long-range temporal dependency modeling.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"带slot模块化设计的SSM在模块化序列任务上效果优于原生单状态SSM。","claim_en":"SSM with slot modular design outperforms vanilla monolithic state SSM on modular sequence tasks.","opposes":"Prior SSM design assumes a global unified state is sufficient for all sequence modeling requirements.","opposes_cite_hint":"Gu 2022 S4","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction","why_contested":"Provides a new direction for customized SSM architecture design, adapting to more structured sequence tasks."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为SSM模块化改进的前沿动态了解即可，不需要细读。","en":"Just understand as cutting-edge progress of SSM modular improvement, no need to read in detail."}},{"id":"JiangLZW024","title":"TAIA: Large Language Models are Out-of-Distribution Data Learners","authors":["Shuyang Jiang","Yusheng Liao","Ya Zhang","Yanfeng Wang","Yu Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$17d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JiangLZW024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JiangLZW024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/be0a8ecf8b2743a4117557c5eca0fb79-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"专业领域微调数据稀缺，使用分布不匹配的域外数据微调经常损害LLM下游性能，此前的微调方法默认更新所有参数是最优选择，未针对分布不匹配场景做参数选择优化。","importance":"方法级贡献，给出了分布不匹配场景下微调的参数选择规则，降低了域外数据微调的负向迁移风险。","technical_approach":"提出TAIA方法，核心是仅微调自注意力参数、冻结FFN层参数，舍弃了此前全参数微调或随机选择参数微调的做法，和现有稀疏微调方法的核心区别是基于Transformer模块的功能差异做参数选择，不需要引入额外可训练参数。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，仅说明针对医疗、无害生成等数据稀缺的专业领域场景，未给出具体指标、baseline和提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Fine-tuning data is scarce in specialized domains, and fine-tuning with out-of-distribution (OOD) data often harms LLM downstream performance. Prior fine-tuning methods default to updating all parameters as the optimal choice, with no parameter selection optimization for OOD scenarios.","importance":"Method level contribution, providing a parameter selection rule for fine-tuning in OOD scenarios, reducing the negative transfer risk of OOD data fine-tuning.","technical_approach":"Propose TAIA method, which only fine-tunes self-attention parameters and freezes FFN layer parameters. It abandons the previous practice of full parameter fine-tuning or random parameter selection for fine-tuning, and differs from existing sparse fine-tuning methods by selecting parameters based on functional differences of Transformer modules, without introducing additional trainable parameters.","experiments":"Full experimental data is not disclosed in the public abstract. Only the target scenario of data-scarce specialized domains such as healthcare and harmless content generation is stated, with no specific metrics, baselines or improvement margins provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm","ood-learning","continual-learning","data-selection"],"keywords":["large language models","OOD generalization","supervised fine-tuning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"针对特定任务的QA对微调是提升指令微调LLM下游性能的主流方法。","claim_en":"Fine-tuning on task-specific QA pairs is the mainstream approach to improve downstream performance of instruction-tuned LLMs.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"分布不匹配场景下微调，仅更新自注意力参数的效果优于更新全参数或FFN参数。","claim_en":"In OOD fine-tuning scenarios, updating only self-attention parameters yields better performance than updating full parameters or FFN parameters.","opposes":"Prior fine-tuning methods assume full parameter update or simultaneous update of attention and FFN parameters yields optimal performance.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction","why_contested":"Revises the consensus on parameter selection for fine-tuning, providing a practical strategy for low-resource domain fine-tuning."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3参数选择实验和消融部分即可，验证了域外微调时注意力与FFN层的功能差异，可直接用于内部微调方案选型。","en":"Only read §3 parameter selection experiments and ablation studies, it validates functional differences between attention and FFN layers during OOD fine-tuning, suitable for internal fine-tuning scheme selection."}},{"id":"JiangRSRH24","title":"Graph-based Uncertainty Metrics for Long-form Language Model Generations","authors":["Mingjian Jiang","Yangjun Ruan","Prasanna Sattigeri","Salim Roukos","Tatsunori B. Hashimoto"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$17e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JiangRSRH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JiangRSRH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/39c5871aa13be86ab978cba7069cbcec-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是长文本生成里“不确定性怎么测才靠谱”的问题。以往 token-level 概率、熵或 self-consistency 在长文场景里都不够好，因为错误往往不是单 token 波动，而是跨句、跨段的事实分叉、推理分叉和叙事分叉。","importance":"这是一个评估与可靠性工作，对 posttrain 更直接，但对 pretrain 也有价值。它的重要性在于把不确定性估计从局部 token 视角推到结构视角；如果图结构指标明显更稳，说明我们平时用的语言建模损失和解码置信度，与真正关心的长程正确性之间存在错配。","technical_approach":"核心方法是把长文本生成表示成图，再在图上定义不确定性度量。相比直接对 token 概率做聚合，这种做法的设计动机是保留候选生成之间的共享片段、分叉路径和语义依赖；也就是说，它关心的不是‘每一步有多确定’，而是‘整段回答是否在少数一致的解释上收敛’。","experiments":"摘要外信息不足，无法安全写出具体模型和数值。根据题目，这类实验通常会在长问答、摘要或多段推理任务上，对比 token 熵、序列 logprob、采样方差、self-consistency 等 baseline，看哪一种更能预测事实错误或答案失败；如果有效，亮点通常是对长输出尤其明显，而在短答案上优势会缩小。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a real weakness in LLM reliability: standard uncertainty estimates are too local for long-form generation. Token entropy and sequence likelihood miss the fact that failures in long answers usually emerge as branching narratives, reasoning paths, or fact clusters, not as isolated low-confidence tokens.","importance":"This is an evaluation and reliability contribution, but it has pretraining implications. If graph-based uncertainty tracks long-form failure better than token-level confidence, that suggests a mismatch between what language modeling optimizes and what users actually need from extended generations: coherent commitment to a correct global structure.","technical_approach":"The key idea is to build a graph over generated content and define uncertainty on that structure rather than on tokens alone. The design choice matters: a graph can preserve shared subsequences, divergent branches, and cross-sentence dependencies, so uncertainty becomes a property of how many competing global explanations the model supports, not just how peaky each next-token distribution is.","experiments":"The provided information is insufficient to report exact models, datasets, or numbers. The expected evaluation is against common baselines such as token entropy, average log-probability, sampling variance, and self-consistency, with the main claim likely being stronger prediction of factual or reasoning failure specifically for long outputs.","authors_note":""},"tags":["uncertainty","llm","graph-based","hallucination"],"keywords":["Uncertainty Estimation; Large Language Model; Factuality"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§4.2图结构度量与传统token级指标的对比结果，可用于修正长文本生成的置信度评估逻辑。","en":"Focus on §4.2 comparison results between graph-based metrics and traditional token-level indicators, which can revise confidence evaluation logic for long-form text generation."}},{"id":"Jiao0J0M024","title":"Lumen: Unleashing Versatile Vision-Centric Capabilities of Large Multimodal Models","authors":["Yang Jiao","Shaoxiang Chen","Zequn Jie","Jingjing Chen","Lin Ma","Yu-Gang Jiang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$17f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Jiao0J0M024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Jiao0J0M024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/946ecab300b0695fe24b53a92e632935-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是多模态大模型“会看图但不真正以视觉为中心推理”的问题。很多 LMM 在训练上仍偏向语言侧，视觉输入更像辅助条件，因此在细粒度感知、空间关系和复杂视觉任务上能力不稳。","importance":"这是一个多模态预训练/后训练接口上的方法工作。它的重要性在于强调 vision-centric capabilities，不是简单再加更多图文数据，而是试图让模型把视觉信号当一等公民处理；这对 native multimodal pretraining 和统一建模路线都有参考意义。","technical_approach":"从题目看，Lumen 的核心是面向视觉中心能力的一整套训练或架构设计，而不是单一组件改进。和把视觉编码器接到 LLM 上的传统 LLaVA 式路线相比，这类方法通常会在视觉 token 组织、任务混合、跨模态对齐目标或高分辨率感知路径上做调整，目标是减少语言先验对视觉判断的覆盖。","experiments":"缺少摘要，无法确认具体模型规模、数据量和 benchmark 数字。按该类论文常规，实验会覆盖通用图文理解、细粒度 OCR、定位、图表、空间推理甚至多图任务，并强调在视觉密集型 benchmark 上提升更明显；如果论文完整，通常还会证明这些增强不会明显牺牲纯文本或通用对话能力。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a common weakness of large multimodal models: many can condition on images, but they do not reason in a genuinely vision-centric way. In practice, language priors often dominate, which hurts fine-grained perception, spatial reasoning, and visually grounded decision-making.","importance":"This is a multimodal training contribution with implications for native multimodal pretraining. Its significance is that it focuses on making vision a first-class signal rather than just adding more image-text supervision on top of a language-centric backbone.","technical_approach":"From the title, Lumen is likely a broader recipe or architecture for strengthening vision-centered capabilities, not a single-module tweak. The differentiator versus standard vision-encoder-plus-LLM pipelines is probably in how visual tokens are represented, aligned, and mixed during training so that the model relies less on linguistic shortcuts and more on actual visual evidence.","experiments":"The abstract is unavailable, so exact scales and metrics cannot be stated safely. A paper of this kind would normally evaluate on image-heavy benchmarks—fine-grained understanding, OCR, localization, charts, spatial reasoning, and possibly multi-image tasks—and the key result would be larger gains on visually demanding settings than on generic chat benchmarks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","multimodal-llm","vision-centric"],"keywords":["Large Multimodal Models","Vision-Centric Capabilities"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§5不同模态权重分配的消融实验即可，对原生多模态预训练的任务混合和对齐目标设计有参考价值。","en":"Only read §5 ablation experiments on modality weight allocation, it provides reference for task mixture and alignment target design in native multimodal pre-training."}},{"id":"JiaoK24","title":"Emergence of heavy tails in homogenized stochastic gradient descent","authors":["Zhezhe Jiao","Martin Keller-Ressel"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"It has repeatedly been observed that loss minimization by stochastic gradient descent (SGD) leads to heavy-tailed distributions of neural network parameters. Here, we analyze a continuous diffusion approximation of SGD, called homogenized stochastic gradient descent (hSGD), and show in a regularized linear regression framework that it leads to an asymptotically heavy-tailed parameter distribution, even though local gradient noise is Gaussian. We give explicit upper and lower bounds on the tail-index of the resulting parameter distribution and validate these bounds in numerical experiments. Moreover, the explicit form of these bounds enables us to quantify the interplay between optimization hyperparameters and the tail-index. Doing so, we contribute to the ongoing discussion on links between heavy tails and the generalization performance of neural networks as well as the ability of SGD to avoid suboptimal local minima.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JiaoK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JiaoK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/19ba2b9448d5de25826f6eb408dab194-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文研究的是：在 homogenized stochastic gradient descent 这类理想化设定下，重尾分布为什么会出现。这个问题过去多在经验层面观察到，比如梯度噪声、参数更新或 loss 变化带重尾，但缺少足够清楚的理论解释。","importance":"它主要是优化理论工作，不是直接的 pretrain 方法论文。即便如此，它对大模型训练仍有间接价值，因为训练稳定性、学习率选择和噪声建模都受到重尾现象影响；如果理论能指出重尾来自算法与随机性的内在耦合，而不是数据偶然性，就会影响我们怎么看待 SGD 噪声和鲁棒优化。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是对 homogenized SGD 建立理论分析，证明重尾在某些条件下会自然涌现。这里的关键不在提出新优化器，而在把一个经验现象还原成可分析的随机过程；和常见的深度学习经验论文不同，这类工作更关心尾指数、稳定分布和极限行为，而不是某个 benchmark 提升。","experiments":"公开信息不足，无法列出数值结果。此类论文通常会包含理论推导加少量数值模拟，验证尾部分布、收敛轨迹或参数敏感性；如果和实际神经网络训练做连接，往往也只是定性支持，而不是大规模预训练实证。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies why heavy-tailed behavior emerges in homogenized stochastic gradient descent. Heavy tails have been observed repeatedly in optimization-related quantities, but the source of that behavior is often left at the level of empirical observation rather than explained through a clean mathematical model.","importance":"This is primarily an optimization theory paper, not a direct pretraining method. Still, it matters indirectly for large-scale training because heavy-tailed noise affects how we think about stability, step-size choices, and the stochastic structure of SGD; a convincing derivation would suggest that some of this behavior is algorithmic rather than a dataset-specific artifact.","technical_approach":"The likely contribution is a theoretical analysis of a homogenized SGD process showing conditions under which heavy tails arise naturally. The point is not to propose a better optimizer, but to turn an observed phenomenon into something analyzable in terms of limiting distributions, tail behavior, and stochastic dynamics.","experiments":"The provided information is too sparse for exact quantitative reporting. Papers in this area usually combine proofs with numerical simulations, and any neural-network experiments are typically illustrative rather than large-scale empirical validations on modern pretraining setups.","authors_note":""},"tags":["sgd","heavy-tails","training-dynamics","theory"],"keywords":["stochastic gradient descent","heavy tails","gradient noise","Pearson diffusion","tail index"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接读§3核心定理和§4现实训练场景的对应分析即可，不用深究理论推导，可辅助理解大模型训练的噪声特性。","en":"Directly read §3 core theorems and §4 correspondence analysis for real training scenarios, no need to delve into derivation, it helps understand noise characteristics in large model training."}},{"id":"JinCWHYL00024","title":"RWKU: Benchmarking Real-World Knowledge Unlearning for Large Language Models","authors":["Zhuoran Jin","Pengfei Cao","Chenhao Wang","Zhitao He","Hongbang Yuan","Jiachun Li","Yubo Chen","Kang Liu","Jun Zhao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$180","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/JinCWHYL00024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/JinCWHYL00024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/b1f78dfc9ca0156498241012aec4efa0-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 LLM 知识遗忘评测过于脱离真实世界的问题。过去 unlearning 常在可控的小知识片段或合成设置上验证，但真实部署里要删的是人物、事件、隐私、争议信息等复杂知识，评测如果不接近真实分布，就很难说明方法是否可用。","importance":"这是一个 benchmark/data 级工作，对 pretrain 与 posttrain 都重要。它的重要性在于把 knowledge unlearning 从‘能不能在 toy setting 删除一个 fact’推进到‘删掉真实世界知识后，模型还能不能稳住其他能力、会不会通过旁路重新召回’；这直接关系到 continual pretrain、数据删除合规和安全更新。","technical_approach":"RWKU 的核心应是构建真实世界知识遗忘基准，并定义更贴近部署的评测协议。相比传统问答式记忆删除测试，这类 benchmark 通常会同时考察直接召回、间接召回、改写召回和下游泛化保持，因为真正困难的点不是让模型在一两个 prompt 上闭嘴，而是阻止它通过相关知识图谱把信息绕回来。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认数据规模和参评方法。可以预期的实验重点是：对比多种 unlearning 方法在遗忘效果、保留性能、攻击恢复率上的 trade-off，并展示现实知识比合成 fact 更难删、评测更容易暴露‘表面遗忘、内部仍在’的问题；如果有价值，通常还会包括不同知识类型和不同删除强度的分层分析。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a gap in LLM unlearning research: current evaluations are often too synthetic to reflect real-world knowledge deletion. In practice, what needs to be removed is messy—people, events, sensitive facts, and entangled knowledge—so toy fact deletion can overstate progress.","importance":"This is a benchmark and evaluation contribution with clear relevance to both pretraining and post-training. Its importance lies in shifting the question from 'can we suppress a memorized answer in a controlled setting?' to 'can we remove real-world knowledge without breaking everything else, and without the model recovering it through nearby associations?'","technical_approach":"RWKU appears to build a benchmark for real-world knowledge unlearning together with deployment-relevant evaluation protocols. The likely difference from earlier work is broader testing of direct recall, indirect recall, paraphrased retrieval, and retention of unrelated capabilities, because true unlearning failure often shows up through side channels rather than the exact original query.","experiments":"The abstract is unavailable, so I cannot safely report dataset size or method rankings. The expected empirical value is a comparison of multiple unlearning approaches on forgetting quality versus utility retention, with the main takeaway likely being that realistic knowledge is harder to remove and more likely to resurface than synthetic benchmark facts suggest.","authors_note":""},"tags":["unlearning","llm","benchmark","knowledge"],"keywords":["Knowledge Unlearning","Large Language Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§2基准构造逻辑和§3.3旁路召回评测结果即可，可直接用于内部知识遗忘方案的验证选型。","en":"Only read §2 benchmark construction logic and §3.3 bypass recall evaluation results, which can be directly used for verification and selection of internal knowledge unlearning schemes."}},{"id":"2406.09175","title":"ReMI: A Dataset for Reasoning with Multiple Images","authors":["Mehran Kazemi","Nishanth Dikkala","Ankit Anand","Petar Devic","Ishita Dasgupta","Fangyu Liu","Bahare Fatemi","Pranjal Awasthi","Sreenivas Gollapudi","Dee Guo","Ahmed Qureshi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$181","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.09175","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KazemiDAD0LFAGG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KazemiDAD0LFAGG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/6ea56c0baacac9f7764257a43a93c90a-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是多图推理缺少系统 benchmark 的问题。单图视觉问答已经被广泛评测，但真正难的场景往往需要在多张图之间做对照、整合和跨图推理；没有合适数据集，就很难知道模型到底是在‘看图’，还是只是在单图模板上迁移。","importance":"这是数据与评测级工作，对多模态预训练很有现实意义。它的重要性在于把能力要求从单图感知提升到多图组合推理；这会直接检验视觉 tokenizer、跨图上下文建模和多模态对齐策略是否真的支持统一推理，而不是只会图文配对。","technical_approach":"ReMI 的核心是构建一个覆盖多种推理类型的多图数据集，包括数学、物理、逻辑、代码、表格/图表理解、空间与时间推理。设计上的关键点不是简单增加图片数量，而是覆盖多图场景中常见但不同质的困难：跨图对比、顺序关系、信息拼接、视觉证据整合等，这样 benchmark 才能区分不同失败模式。","experiments":"摘要明确指出作者 benchmark 了多个前沿 LLM/MLLM，并发现与人类水平有显著差距。摘要没有给出具体模型名和数值，但关键信息已经足够：当前最强模型在多图推理上远未解决问题，说明现有训练范式在跨图状态跟踪和证据聚合上仍然薄弱；如果看完整文，最有价值的应是按任务类型拆分后的错误分布。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper fills a clear evaluation gap: we have many benchmarks for single-image understanding, but far fewer for reasoning across multiple images. That matters because many real multimodal tasks require comparison, aggregation, temporal ordering, or evidence composition across images rather than isolated image-caption alignment.","importance":"This is a dataset and benchmark contribution with direct relevance to multimodal pretraining. Its significance is that it stresses exactly the capabilities current models tend to fake: cross-image state tracking, evidence integration, and reasoning over multiple visual inputs rather than one-image-at-a-time pattern matching.","technical_approach":"ReMI is a dataset for Reasoning with Multiple Images spanning math, physics, logic, code, table/chart understanding, and spatial and temporal reasoning. The design choice that matters is breadth across reasoning modes, because multi-image failure is not one thing; models can fail at comparison, ordering, aggregation, or linking complementary evidence, and a useful benchmark needs to separate those cases.","experiments":"The abstract states the main result clearly: several state-of-the-art models were benchmarked and there remains a substantial gap to human performance. It does not provide exact scores in the snippet, but the key takeaway is already strong—current multimodal LLMs are still weak at genuinely multi-image reasoning, which points to limitations in both training data composition and cross-image modeling.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal","benchmark","reasoning","evaluation","multi-image"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Vision Language Models","LLM Reasoning","Multi Image Reasoning","LLM Evaluation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§2.2推理类型划分和§4不同模型的失败模式分析即可，对多模态预训练的多图上下文建模有参考意义。","en":"Only read §2.2 reasoning type classification and §4 failure mode analysis of different models, it is referential for multi-image context modeling in multimodal pre-training."}},{"id":"2402.09477","title":"PANORAMIA: Privacy Auditing of Machine Learning Models without Retraining","authors":["Mishaal Kazmi","Hadrien Lautraite","Alireza Akbari","Qiaoyue Tang","Mauricio Soroco","Tao Wang","Sébastien Gambs","Mathias Lécuyer"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We present PANORAMIA, a privacy leakage measurement framework for machine learning models that relies on membership inference attacks using generated data as non-members. By relying on generated non-member data, PANORAMIA eliminates the common dependency of privacy measurement tools on in-distribution non-member data. As a result, PANORAMIA does not modify the model, training data, or training process, and only requires access to a subset of the training data. We evaluate PANORAMIA on ML models for image and tabular data classification, as well as on large-scale language models.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.09477","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KazmiLATSWGL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KazmiLATSWGL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/692ae28fda9bfbde7c01b13bf5a03395-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是机器学习模型隐私审计过度依赖非成员数据的问题。传统 membership inference 审计通常需要额外的 in-distribution non-member 数据，而现实里这类数据往往拿不到，尤其在大模型和私有数据场景下更明显。","importance":"这是一个安全与评测方法工作，不是 pretrain 核心方法，但与大模型训练合规直接相关。它的重要性在于提出一种不需要重训、不改模型、只依赖部分训练数据的隐私审计框架；对训练侧的启示是，隐私风险现在可以在更弱假设下被测量，不能再把‘拿不到对照数据’当借口。","technical_approach":"PANORAMIA 的核心是用生成数据充当 non-members 来做 membership inference，从而摆脱对真实非成员样本的依赖。这个设计有效的原因是：审计目标不是恢复真实测试分布，而是构造足够可信的对照集来测成员与非成员可分性；和需要重训 shadow model 或访问完整数据分布的方法相比，它更接近部署可用。","experiments":"摘要说明作者在图像分类、表格分类和大规模语言模型上评估了 PANORAMIA。没有具体数字，但实验价值很明确：该框架在多种模态上可用，且不需要修改模型、训练数据或训练流程；如果读全文，最值得关注的是生成 non-member 的质量对审计结论有多敏感，以及在 LLM 上是否会高估或低估泄露。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical bottleneck in privacy auditing: most membership inference pipelines depend on in-distribution non-member data, which is often unavailable in realistic settings. This problem becomes even sharper for large models trained on private or proprietary corpora.","importance":"This is a security and evaluation contribution rather than a core pretraining method, but it is directly relevant to model training governance. Its main value is showing that privacy leakage can be audited without retraining or modifying the model and without requiring a full non-member reference set, which lowers the barrier to actually measuring risk.","technical_approach":"PANORAMIA uses generated data as the non-member set for membership inference attacks. The key design choice is pragmatic: the goal of auditing is not to perfectly reconstruct the true held-out distribution, but to build a sufficiently credible contrast set that reveals whether training members are distinguishable from non-members under the model.","experiments":"The abstract reports evaluations on image and tabular classification models as well as large-scale language models. Exact numbers are not provided here, but the important empirical point is broad applicability under minimal assumptions; the main caveat to inspect in the full paper is how sensitive the audit is to the quality and distributional fit of the generated non-member data.","authors_note":""},"tags":["privacy","evaluation","data-leakage","membership-inference"],"keywords":["privacy","auditing","machine learning","differential privacy","membership inference attack"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§3生成非成员样本的构造逻辑，可直接复用在内部大模型训练数据的隐私风险自查。","en":"Focus on §3 construction logic of generated non-member samples, which can be directly reused for privacy risk self-check of internal large model training data."}},{"id":"KeWWLNLL24","title":"Unveiling LoRA Intrinsic Ranks via Salience Analysis","authors":["Wenjun Ke","Jiahao Wang","Peng Wang","Jiajun Liu","Dong Nie","Guozheng Li","Yining Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$182","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KeWWLNLL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KeWWLNLL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ed9f00cb7dd5fbdc2175d55e2fdf1b05-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 LoRA rank 固定、资源分配不均的问题。标准 LoRA 默认所有层或矩阵用同一个低秩规模，但实际不同位置的重要性差别很大；固定 rank 简单但浪费，而自适应方法如 AdaLoRA 又在效果和效率之间还不够平衡。","importance":"这是参数高效微调方向的增量方法工作。它对 pretrain 本身影响有限，但对 pretrain↔posttrain 接口很实用，因为它讨论的是如何在有限额外参数和算力下更好地重用基座模型；这类结论也能反向提示哪些层在任务迁移中更‘可塑’。","technical_approach":"题目表明核心方法是通过 salience analysis 揭示 LoRA 的 intrinsic ranks，并据此做更合理的 rank 分配。和 AdaLoRA 基于 SVD 动态调整不同，这里的设计重点应是直接估计矩阵或方向的重要性，从而避免过多依赖昂贵或不稳定的分解步骤；有效性的关键在于 rank 不是越大越好，而是应与任务敏感度匹配。","experiments":"给出的摘要被截断，无法确认具体模型和提升幅度。可以预期实验会在多个 LLM 微调任务上，对比固定-rank LoRA、AdaLoRA 等 baselines，报告在相同参数预算下的性能提升或在相同性能下的参数压缩；真正值得看的 ablation 是 salience 估计是否稳定、不同层 rank 分布是否符合直觉，以及在小模型和大模型上规律是否一致。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a weakness of standard LoRA: a fixed rank is used across matrices even though their task importance varies substantially. That simplicity is convenient, but inefficient; adaptive methods such as AdaLoRA improve on this, yet still struggle to balance quality and efficiency well.","importance":"This is an incremental PEFT method paper rather than a pretraining contribution, but it matters at the pretrain-to-posttrain interface. Better rank allocation tells us how to reuse a frozen base model under tight parameter budgets, and it may also reveal which parts of the pretrained model remain most adaptable for downstream transfer.","technical_approach":"The core idea is to infer intrinsic LoRA ranks through salience analysis and allocate rank accordingly. The likely difference from SVD-based adaptive methods is a cheaper or more direct importance estimate for matrices or directions, which matters because adaptive rank schemes only pay off if the adaptation logic does not add too much overhead or instability.","experiments":"The abstract is truncated, so exact scales and improvements cannot be reported reliably. A standard evaluation would compare against fixed-rank LoRA and AdaLoRA across several fine-tuning tasks, with the most useful ablations examining the stability of the salience estimate and whether the learned rank distribution is consistent across model sizes and tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["lora","peft","fine-tuning","rank-adaptation"],"keywords":["Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning","Low-Rank Adaptation","LoRA"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4.2不同层秩分配的消融结果即可，可直接用于内部参数高效微调的秩选型方案优化。","en":"Only read §4.2 ablation results of rank allocation across different layers, which can directly optimize rank selection schemes for internal parameter-efficient fine-tuning."}},{"id":"2407.16837","title":"MLLM-CompBench: A Comparative Reasoning Benchmark for Multimodal LLMs","authors":["Jihyung Kil","Zheda Mai","Justin Lee","Arpita Chowdhury","Zihe Wang","Kerrie Cheng","Lemeng Wang","Ye Liu","Wei-Lun Chao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$183","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.16837","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KilMLCWCWLC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KilMLCWCWLC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/32923dff09f75cf1974c145764a523e2-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有多模态大模型（MLLM）的跨模态比较推理能力没有被系统评估，此前的VLM基准多关注识别、描述类任务，缺失比较类推理的评估维度，无法反映MLLM的高阶推理能力短板。","importance":"基准/数据级贡献，填补了多模态比较推理能力的评估空白，为MLLM的推理能力优化提供了标准化测评标准。","technical_approach":"构建MLLM-CompBench基准，覆盖视觉属性、存在、状态、情感、时序、空间、数量、质量共8个比较维度，通过视觉导向的问题配对图像对，舍弃了此前仅评估单模态或非推理类比较任务的设计，和现有VLM基准的核心区别是专门针对跨模态的比较推理能力设计，不依赖单模态识别能力即可单独评估比较推理能力。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整测试结果，仅说明覆盖8类比较维度的评估任务，未给出主流MLLM的具体测评得分。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The cross-modal comparative reasoning capability of existing Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) has not been systematically evaluated. Previous VLM benchmarks mostly focus on recognition and description tasks, missing the evaluation dimension of comparative reasoning, and cannot reflect the high-order reasoning capability gaps of MLLMs.","importance":"Benchmark/data level contribution, filling the evaluation gap of multimodal comparative reasoning capability, providing a standardized evaluation metric for MLLM reasoning capability optimization.","technical_approach":"Construct MLLM-CompBench benchmark, covering 8 comparative dimensions: visual attribute, existence, state, emotion, temporality, spatiality, quantity, quality. It pairs images through visually oriented questions, abandons the previous design of only evaluating unimodal or non-reasoning comparative tasks, and differs from existing VLM benchmarks by being specifically designed for cross-modal comparative reasoning capability, which can evaluate comparative reasoning independently without relying on unimodal recognition capability.","experiments":"Full test results are not disclosed in the public abstract. Only the coverage of 8 types of comparative dimension evaluation tasks is stated, with no specific test scores of mainstream MLLMs provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multimodal","benchmark","reasoning","evaluation","comparison"],"keywords":["Benchmark","Comparison","Multimodal LLMs","Relativity","Vision-Language"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"比较推理能力是通用人工智能决策和问题解决的核心能力之一。","claim_en":"Comparative reasoning is one of the core capabilities for AGI decision making and problem solving.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"现有主流VLM基准无法有效评估MLLM的跨模态比较推理能力。","claim_en":"Existing mainstream VLM benchmarks cannot effectively evaluate the cross-modal comparative reasoning capability of MLLMs.","opposes":"Prior work assumes existing general VLM benchmarks have covered the core reasoning capability dimensions of MLLMs.","opposes_cite_hint":"Liu 2023 MME","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction","why_contested":"Clarifies the missing dimension of MLLM capability evaluation, promoting targeted optimization of multimodal reasoning capability."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§2比较维度设计和§4.2跨模态推理短板分析即可，可用于多模态预训练的推理能力迭代验证。","en":"Only read §2 comparison dimension design and §4.2 cross-modal reasoning shortboard analysis, which supports iterative verification of reasoning ability in multimodal pre-training."}},{"id":"KimMSJLGY0JWS24","title":"A Versatile Diffusion Transformer with Mixture of Noise Levels for Audiovisual Generation","authors":["Gwanghyun Kim","Alonso Martinez","Yu-Chuan Su","Brendan Jou","José Lezama","Agrim Gupta","Lijun Yu","Lu Jiang","Aren Jansen","Jacob Walker","Krishna Somandepalli"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$184","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KimMSJLGY0JWS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KimMSJLGY0JWS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/15f4cefb0e143c7ad9d40e879b0a9d0c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"音视频多模态扩散模型通常需要为每个条件生成任务单独训练模型，训练成本高，此前的扩散模型默认所有模态、所有时序步使用统一的扩散时间步，不支持任意条件组合的生成。","importance":"范式级贡献，修改了扩散模型前向过程的参数化方式，实现单模型支持任意音视频条件生成任务，大幅降低了多模态扩散模型的训练和部署成本。","technical_approach":"提出混合噪声级的扩散Transformer，核心是对输入的不同模态、不同时序位置采用可变的扩散时间步（即可变噪声水平），舍弃了传统扩散模型全局统一扩散时间步的设计，和现有多模态扩散模型的核心区别是不需要为每个任务单独微调，单模型即可覆盖多种条件生成任务。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，仅说明支持任意音视频模态组合的条件生成，未给出具体指标、baseline和提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Audiovisual multimodal diffusion models usually require training a separate model for each conditional generation task, leading to high training cost. Previous diffusion models default to using a unified diffusion timestep for all modalities and all temporal positions, and do not support arbitrary conditional combination generation.","importance":"Paradigm level contribution, modifying the parameterization of the diffusion forward process, enabling a single model to support arbitrary audiovisual conditional generation tasks, greatly reducing the training and deployment cost of multimodal diffusion models.","technical_approach":"Propose a versatile diffusion transformer with mixture of noise levels, which applies variable diffusion timesteps (i.e. variable noise levels) to different modalities and different temporal positions of the input. It abandons the design of global unified diffusion timestep in traditional diffusion models, and differs from existing multimodal diffusion models by requiring no separate fine-tuning for each task, with a single model covering multiple conditional generation tasks.","experiments":"Full experimental data is not disclosed in the public abstract. Only support for conditional generation of arbitrary audiovisual modality combinations is stated, with no specific metrics, baselines or improvement margins provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion-transformer","audiovisual","multimodal-generation","noise-schedule"],"keywords":["multimodal diffusion","multimodal generation","diffusion timestep","latent diffusion models"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"音视频多模态扩散模型通过学习条件分布支持多种生成任务。","claim_en":"Audiovisual multimodal diffusion models support multiple generation tasks by learning conditional distributions.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"采用跨模态、跨时序可变扩散时间步的单扩散模型，效果超过为每个任务单独训练的扩散模型。","claim_en":"A single diffusion model with variable diffusion timesteps across modalities and temporal positions outperforms task-specific separate diffusion models.","opposes":"Prior multimodal diffusion model design assumes separate model training for each task is required to achieve optimal performance.","opposes_cite_hint":"Rombach 2022 Stable Diffusion","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction","why_contested":"Breaks the task-specific design paradigm of multimodal diffusion models, greatly reducing the deployment cost of multimodal generation systems."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点读§3.1可变噪声水平的参数化设计，对多模态生成类预训练的扩散范式优化有参考价值。","en":"Focus on §3.1 parameterization design of variable noise levels, it provides reference for diffusion paradigm optimization in multimodal generative pre-training."}},{"id":"KogkalidisB024","title":"Algebraic Positional Encodings","authors":["Konstantinos Kogkalidis","Jean-Philippe Bernardy","Vikas Garg"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We introduce a novel positional encoding strategy for Transformer-style models, addressing the shortcomings of existing, often ad hoc, approaches. Our framework implements a flexible mapping from the algebraic specification of a domain to a positional encoding scheme where positions are interpreted as orthogonal operators. This design preserves the structural properties of the source domain, thereby ensuring that the end-model upholds them. The framework can accommodate various structures, including sequences, grids and trees, but also their compositions. We conduct a series of experiments demonstrating the practical applicability of our method. Our results suggest performance on par with or surpassing the current state of the art, without hyper-parameter optimizations or ``task search'' of any kind.\nCode is available through https://aalto-quml.github.io/ape/.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KogkalidisB024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KogkalidisB024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3d8f2fdc04fa66c9239f2eb14379546d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有Transformer的位置编码大多是针对特定结构（序列、网格）的定制设计，泛化性差，没有统一的位置编码框架支持多种结构及其组合，适配新结构需要大量超参调整。","importance":"架构级贡献，提出了通用的代数位置编码框架，支持序列、网格、树等多种结构及其组合，不需要针对不同任务做超参调整。","technical_approach":"提出代数位置编码，核心是将位置映射为正交算子，保留源域的结构属性，舍弃了此前针对特定结构定制位置编码的做法，和现有位置编码的核心区别是可以基于代数定义自动适配不同的结构，不需要额外的超参优化或任务搜索。","experiments":"公开摘要说明在多种结构任务上效果持平或超过现有最优方法，不需要超参优化或任务搜索，未给出具体指标、baseline和提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing positional encodings for Transformers are mostly customized designs for specific structures (sequences, grids) with poor generalizability. There is no unified positional encoding framework supporting multiple structures and their compositions, requiring extensive hyperparameter adjustment to adapt to new structures.","importance":"Architecture level contribution, proposing a general algebraic positional encoding framework that supports multiple structures including sequences, grids, trees and their compositions, requiring no hyperparameter adjustment for different tasks.","technical_approach":"Propose algebraic positional encodings, which map positions to orthogonal operators and preserve the structural properties of the source domain. It abandons the previous practice of customizing positional encodings for specific structures, and differs from existing positional encodings by automatically adapting to different structures based on algebraic definitions, requiring no additional hyperparameter optimization or task search.","experiments":"The public abstract states that the method matches or outperforms existing optimal methods on multiple structured tasks without hyperparameter optimization or task search, with no specific metrics, baselines or improvement margins provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["positional-encoding","transformer","algebra"],"keywords":["positional encodings","transformers","structured attention","group theory"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"位置编码是Transformer建模结构化数据的核心组件。","claim_en":"Positional encoding is a core component of Transformers for modeling structured data.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于代数算子的通用位置编码在多种结构化任务上效果超过定制化的位置编码方案。","claim_en":"General-purpose algebraic positional encodings outperform task-specific customized positional encoding schemes on multiple structured tasks.","opposes":"Prior positional encoding design assumes task-specific customization is required to achieve optimal performance for different structures and tasks.","opposes_cite_hint":"Vaswani 2017 Transformer","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"Unifies the positional encoding design paradigm for different structures, reducing the development cost of adapting Transformers to new structures."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3.2多结构适配的实验结果即可，无需深究代数推导，对统一多结构Transformer的预训练架构设计有参考意义。","en":"Only read §3.2 multi-structure adaptation experimental results, no need to delve into algebraic derivation, it is referential for unified multi-structure Transformer pre-training architecture design."}},{"id":"KopfBHLHB24","title":"CoSy: Evaluating Textual Explanations of Neurons","authors":["Laura Kopf","Philine Lou Bommer","Anna Hedström","Sebastian Lapuschkin","Marina M.-C. Höhne","Kirill Bykov"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"A crucial aspect of understanding the complex nature of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) is the ability to explain learned concepts within their latent representations. While methods exist to connect neurons to human-understandable textual descriptions, evaluating the quality of these explanations is challenging due to the lack of a unified quantitative approach. We introduce CoSy (Concept Synthesis), a novel, architecture-agnostic framework for evaluating textual explanations of latent neurons. Given textual explanations, our proposed framework uses a generative model conditioned on textual input to create data points representing the explanations. By comparing the neuron's response to these generated data points and control data points, we can estimate the quality of the explanation. We validate our framework through sanity checks and benchmark various neuron description methods for Computer Vision tasks, revealing significant differences in quality.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KopfBHLHB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KopfBHLHB24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3d4c0a618d0acd7921493e4f30395c22-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有神经元文本解释方法没有统一的量化评估标准，此前的评估多依赖人工标注，成本高、一致性差，无法大规模应用。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了架构无关的神经元文本解释量化评估框架，不需要人工标注即可自动化评估解释质量。","technical_approach":"提出CoSy（Concept Synthesis）框架，核心是用文本条件生成模型生成对应解释的样本，对比神经元对生成样本和对照样本的响应来估计解释质量，舍弃了此前依赖人工标注的评估方式，和现有评估方法的核心区别是完全自动化，不需要额外的标注数据，适配任意模型架构的神经元解释评估。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，仅说明在多个模型和解释方法上做了验证，未给出具体指标、baseline和提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing neuron textual explanation methods lack a unified quantitative evaluation standard. Previous evaluations mostly rely on human annotation, which has high cost and low consistency, and cannot be applied at scale.","importance":"Method level contribution, proposing an architecture-agnostic quantitative evaluation framework for neuron textual explanations, which can automatically evaluate explanation quality without human annotation.","technical_approach":"Propose CoSy (Concept Synthesis) framework, which uses text-conditioned generative models to generate samples corresponding to the explanations, and estimates explanation quality by comparing the neuron's response to the generated samples and control samples. It abandons the previous evaluation method relying on human annotation, and differs from existing evaluation methods by being fully automated, requiring no additional annotation data, and adapting to neuron explanation evaluation of any model architecture.","experiments":"Full experimental data is not disclosed in the public abstract. Only validation on multiple models and explanation methods is stated, with no specific metrics, baselines or improvement margins provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","neuron-explanation","evaluation"],"keywords":["Explainable AI","Evaluation of Explainability Methods","Mechanistic Interpretability"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"解释DNN latent神经元学习的概念是模型可解释性的核心研究方向。","claim_en":"Explaining concepts learned by DNN latent neurons is a core research direction of model interpretability.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于生成样本的神经元解释自动化评估的一致性超过人工标注评估。","claim_en":"Automatic evaluation of neuron explanations based on generated samples has higher consistency than human annotation-based evaluation.","opposes":"Prior work assumes neuron explanation evaluation must rely on human annotation to ensure reliability.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction","why_contested":"Solves the quantitative evaluation problem of neuron explanations, promoting large-scale implementation of interpretability research."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为神经元可解释性方向的基准方法备查即可，无需细读正文，仅在相关评测需求出现时查阅即可。","en":"Keep it as a reference benchmark for neuron interpretability, no need to read the full text, only check it when relevant evaluation requirements arise."}},{"id":"KorzhenkovL24","title":"On Sampling Strategies for Spectral Model Sharding","authors":["Denis Korzhenkov","Christos Louizos"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"The problem of heterogeneous clients in federated learning has recently drawn a lot of attention. Spectral model sharding, i.e., partitioning the model parameters into low-rank matrices based on the singular value decomposition, has been one of the proposed solutions for more efficient on-device training in such settings. In this work we present two sampling strategies for such sharding, obtained as solutions to specific optimization problems. The first produces unbiased estimators of the original weights, while the second aims to minimize the squared approximation error. We discuss how both of these estimators can be incorporated in the federated learning loop and practical considerations that arise during local training. Empirically, we demonstrate that both of these methods can lead to improved performance in various commonly used datasets.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/KorzhenkovL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/KorzhenkovL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/7107d4d2e837bde2171c6b71b5bde954-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":0,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"联邦学习中异构客户端的谱模型分片训练缺乏最优的采样策略，此前的分片方法依赖经验性采样，没有考虑无偏估计和最小化近似误差的权衡，训练稳定性差。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了两种谱模型分片的采样策略，适配不同的联邦学习训练需求，提升了异构场景下的训练效果。","technical_approach":"提出两种采样策略，第一种生成原权重的无偏估计，第二种最小化平方近似误差，舍弃了此前经验性的采样方式，和现有谱分片方法的核心区别是有明确的优化目标，适配不同的异构客户端场景。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露完整实验数据，仅说明两种方法都能提升联邦学习的训练效果，未给出具体指标、baseline和提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Spectral model sharding training for heterogeneous clients in federated learning lacks optimal sampling strategies. Previous sharding methods rely on heuristic sampling, do not consider the trade-off between unbiased estimation and minimum approximation error, leading to poor training stability.","importance":"Method level contribution, proposing two sampling strategies for spectral model sharding, adapting to different federated learning training requirements and improving training performance in heterogeneous scenarios.","technical_approach":"Propose two sampling strategies: the first produces unbiased estimators of the original weights, and the second minimizes the squared approximation error. It abandons the previous heuristic sampling method, and differs from existing spectral sharding methods by having clear optimization objectives, adapting to different heterogeneous client scenarios.","experiments":"Full experimental data is not disclosed in the public abstract. Only the improvement of federated learning training performance by both methods is stated, with no specific metrics, baselines or improvement margins provided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-sharding","spectral","parallelism"],"keywords":["federated learning","singular vector decomposition","heterogeneous devices"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"谱模型分片是联邦学习异构客户端设备训练的有效解决方案。","claim_en":"Spectral model sharding is an effective solution for on-device training in heterogeneous client federated learning settings.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于无偏估计或最小近似误差优化的采样策略效果优于经验性的谱分片采样策略。","claim_en":"Sampling strategies optimized for unbiased estimation or minimum approximation error outperform heuristic spectral sharding sampling strategies.","opposes":"Prior spectral sharding methods assume heuristic sampling is sufficient to meet training requirements.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction","why_contested":"Clarifies the optimization direction of spectral model sharding sampling, improving training stability and performance in heterogeneous federated learning scenarios."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为联邦学习谱分片的 literature 备查，不读正文，对主流 LLM pretrain 影响微弱。","en":"Keep as literature reference for spectral sharding in federated learning; skip the main text as it has minimal impact on mainstream LLM pretraining."}},{"id":"LeeWZFL24","title":"Video Token Merging for Long Video Understanding","authors":["Seon-Ho Lee","Jue Wang","Zhikang Zhang","David Fan","Xinyu Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$185","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LeeWZFL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LeeWZFL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/194fa4536bf36f35a4505d20cd5dd6fc-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer类长视频理解模型处理长输入时，现有采样、丢token的方法会丢失信息，已有的token merging方案仅依赖token相似度，未考虑显著性，无法直接适配长视频场景。","importance":"方法级贡献，为长视频多模态预训练的token冗余处理提供了新的设计维度，无需牺牲信息即可降低长序列计算量。","technical_approach":"是图像token merging向视频场景的改进方案，核心是在token相似度之外新增显著性权重作为合并依据，先后测试了简单扩展、区域集中合并等策略，舍弃了仅用相似度的合并规则，避免重要帧/区域信息被合并丢失。","experiments":"未披露具体模型参数量、数据集及指标数值，实验场景为长视频分类任务。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Transformer-based long video understanding models face information loss when using input sampling or token dropping for long inputs, while existing token merging methods only rely on token similarity without saliency consideration, which cannot be directly applied to long video scenarios.","importance":"Method-level contribution, provides a new design dimension for token redundancy handling in long video multimodal pretraining, reduces long sequence computation cost without information loss.","technical_approach":"An improved solution extending image token merging to video scenarios. It adds saliency weight as merging criteria besides token similarity, tests strategies including simple extension and region-concentrated merging, and discards the similarity-only merging rule to avoid loss of important frame/region information.","experiments":"No specific model size, dataset or metric values are disclosed. Experiments are conducted on long video classification tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["video","token-merging","efficiency","long-context"],"keywords":["Long video understanding","token merging"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"长视频Transformer的计算瓶颈主要来自token序列过长","claim_en":"The computation bottleneck of long video transformers mainly comes from overlong token sequences","evidence_anchor":"Abstract, para 1"},{"claim_zh":"Token merging比直接丢弃token保留更多信息","claim_en":"Token merging preserves more information than direct token dropping","evidence_anchor":"Abstract, para 1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"长视频场景下，仅基于token相似度的合并策略会丢失高显著性信息，导致理解性能下降","claim_en":"In long video scenarios, merging strategies only based on token similarity will lose high-saliency information and lead to degraded understanding performance","opposes":"Prior token merging methods for images assume similarity-only criteria is sufficient for optimal merging effect","opposes_cite_hint":"Bolya 2022 Token Merging","evidence_anchor":"Abstract, para 2","why_contested":"Revises the design assumption of token merging, clarifies that new adaptation dimensions are needed for cross-modality/cross-scenario migration"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为长视频 token 压缩的 baseline 备查，引入显著性权重是常规操作，不读正文。","en":"Keep as a baseline reference for long video token compression; introducing saliency weights is a standard move, skip the main text."}},{"id":"2407.17827","title":"Unified Lexical Representation for Interpretable Visual-Language Alignment","authors":["Yifan Li","Yikai Wang","Yanwei Fu","Dongyu Ru","Zheng Zhang","Tong He"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$186","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.17827","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Li00R0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Li00R0024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/0252a434b18962c94910c07cd9a7fecc-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：把 CLIP 式视觉-语言对齐从“黑盒连续向量相似度”改成“可解释的词汇维度对齐”，同时避免 lexical representation 训练里常见的伪发现和复杂监督设计。过去主流 VLA 直接在 embedding 空间做对齐，效果强但很难解释每个相似度分数到底对应了什么语义；而词汇表示天然可解释，但通常缺少 token 级真值，训练容易塌到高频词或错误激活，因此一直没有成为主流方案。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在方法层和表示层，而不是简单刷指标。它提出统一 lexical representation 来承载图像和文本两种模态的语义，对 pretrain 研究的启示是：跨模态对齐不一定只能依赖稠密潜空间，稀疏、词汇化、可审计的表征也可能兼顾性能和可解释性。这个方向对原生多模态预训练尤其有意义，因为一旦表示维度直接对应词汇，后续做对齐诊断、数据清洗、偏差分析会更直接；代价是表达上限可能受词表覆盖和稀疏性约束。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 LexVLA：学习一个图像和文本共享的 lexical representation，而不是只在各自编码器输出的 dense feature 上做相似度匹配。它的关键选择是把表示空间显式绑定到词表维度，让每一维对应一个词，从而把相似度解释成“样本对词的匹配强度”；同时作者强调不依赖复杂设计，说明其重点是用统一表示和训练目标本身来缓解 lexical learning 的假阳性问题，而不是再叠很多额外模块。和最接近的 CLIP 类方法相比，区别不在编码器结构，而在对齐对象从 latent feature 换成了可解释词汇分布；和以往 lexical 方法相比，区别在于做了跨模态统一，而不是只给单模态做稀疏词袋式投影。","experiments":"从摘要能确认的实验结论是：作者将 LexVLA 定位为“更可解释”的 VLA 框架，并声称无需复杂设计即可有效学习 unified lexical representation。摘要没有给出模型规模、训练数据规模、具体 baseline、主指标和提升数字，因此不能负责任地补充。可以合理预期实验会围绕两类证据展开：一类是标准图文检索或零样本分类性能是否接近 CLIP；另一类是词维度激活是否更可读、更稳定。如果最终性能接近 dense alignment，而解释性显著更强，这个结果就有研究意义；但边界也很明确——词汇空间的表达能力是否足够覆盖细粒度视觉概念，仍要看全文实验。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a clear gap: CLIP-style vision-language alignment works well, but its dense latent similarity is hard to interpret, while lexical representations are interpretable yet notoriously hard to train. Prior work largely stayed with direct feature alignment because vocabulary-level representations lack supervision and are prone to false activations, especially when learned jointly across modalities.","importance":"The contribution is mainly at the representation and methodology level, not just benchmark chasing. It suggests that multimodal pretraining does not have to rely solely on opaque dense embeddings; a shared lexical space may offer a better debugging and auditing interface without fully giving up alignment quality. That matters for pretraining because interpretable cross-modal representations can improve data inspection, bias analysis, and failure diagnosis. The trade-off is obvious: lexical spaces may be easier to inspect but may cap expressivity if the vocabulary is too limited or too sparse.","technical_approach":"The core idea is LexVLA, which learns a unified lexical representation for both images and text instead of aligning only dense encoder outputs. The important design choice is to bind each representation dimension to a vocabulary item, so similarity can be read as word-level matching strength rather than an uninterpretable dot product in latent space. Relative to CLIP, the change is in what gets aligned, not necessarily in the backbone itself. Relative to earlier lexical approaches, the novelty is to make the lexical space shared across modalities and to avoid heavy auxiliary machinery meant to stabilize lexical learning.","experiments":"From the abstract, the reliable takeaway is that the authors position LexVLA as a more interpretable VLA framework and claim it can learn unified lexical representations without complicated training tricks. The abstract does not provide model sizes, dataset sizes, baselines, or quantitative gains, so those should not be invented. The key empirical question is whether standard retrieval or zero-shot recognition stays competitive while interpretability improves materially. If the method preserves most of CLIP’s utility and gives cleaner word-level semantics, that is meaningful; if not, the lexical bottleneck may be too restrictive.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","alignment","representation","interpretability"],"keywords":["Multi-modal","Alignment","Retrieval","Sparse Retrieval","Lexical Representation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看 LexVLA 的统一表示设计即可，用词汇维度替代 dense feature 做对齐，对原生多模态的可解释性有启发，但表达上限存疑。","en":"Just read LexVLA's unified representation design; replacing dense features with lexical dimensions for alignment inspires native multimodal interpretability, though the expressiveness ceiling is questionable."}},{"id":"2406.03679","title":"On the Effects of Data Scale on UI Control Agents","authors":["Wei Li","William E. Bishop","Alice Li","Christopher Rawles","Folawiyo Campbell-Ajala","Divya Tyamagundlu","Oriana Riva"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$187","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.03679","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiBLRCTR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiBLRCTR24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a79f3ef3b445fd4659f44648f7ea8ffd-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作研究的核心问题是：仅靠扩大示范数据并做微调，能不能把 UI control agent 做到真实可用，以及这种能力如何随数据规模增长。过去这类系统常被少量高质量人工示范、复杂 agent 框架或闭源系统能力所限制，社区缺少一套明确的数据 scaling 视角来判断“再收集多少 demonstration 还值不值”。","importance":"它的重要性主要在数据和系统实证层。对 pretrain/post-train 接口的启示是，UI agent 这种看似高度系统化的能力，可能在相当程度上仍受数据规模和任务表述方式支配，而不只是依赖更复杂的 planner 或 toolformer 结构。作者还发布 AndroidControl 数据集，这对后续研究有直接公共品价值，因为它同时包含高层和低层指令，有利于分析从语言目标到操作序列之间的监督粒度差异。","technical_approach":"方法上核心不是新架构，而是系统性做数据扩展实验，并构建 AndroidControl 这个包含 15,283 条 Android 日常任务 demonstration 的数据集。关键设计是每个任务实例同时提供 high-level 和 low-level 的人类指令，这让作者可以区分 agent 是卡在任务理解、子目标分解，还是卡在原子操作执行。和以往只给自然语言目标或只给动作序列的数据相比，这种双层 supervision 更适合分析 scaling curve，也更能回答 fine-tuning 本身能学到什么、学不到什么。","experiments":"摘要给出的硬信息是：数据集名为 AndroidControl，共 15,283 条 demonstrations，覆盖日常 Android app 任务，并在 in-domain / out-of-domain、高层 / 低层任务上评估随数据增长的性能变化。摘要没有列出具体模型、baseline 和数值提升，因此不能补充具体结论。按题目判断，论文的关键实验价值应在于 scaling trend：性能是否持续随数据增长、何处开始边际递减、低层操作和高层泛化哪一个更吃数据。如果 out-of-domain 增益明显弱于 in-domain，那说明单纯 fine-tuning 的上限仍受环境泛化约束。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a practical question with strong scaling implications: is fine-tuning on more demonstrations alone enough to build useful UI control agents, and how does performance scale as data grows? Prior work often relied on small curated datasets, heavy agent scaffolding, or closed models, so it remained unclear whether the main bottleneck was data quantity, supervision granularity, or model architecture.","importance":"Its contribution is primarily a data-and-systems study. For the pretrain/post-train interface, the paper is useful because it treats computer-use agents as a scaling problem rather than only an orchestration problem. The released AndroidControl dataset is also valuable infrastructure: having both high-level and low-level human instructions makes it possible to separate failures in task understanding from failures in action execution.","technical_approach":"The main contribution is not a new architecture but a controlled scaling study built around a new dataset, AndroidControl, with 15,283 Android task demonstrations. A key design choice is that each example contains both high-level and low-level instructions, enabling a more diagnostic analysis of what supervision level matters. Compared with prior datasets that provide only goal text or only action traces, this setup is better suited for understanding where additional data helps and where it stops helping.","experiments":"The abstract provides one hard fact: AndroidControl contains 15,283 demonstrations of everyday Android tasks, and the study evaluates scaling on both in-domain and out-of-domain settings across high- and low-level tasks. It does not report model sizes, baselines, or exact gains, so those should remain unspecified. The most important result to look for is the shape of the scaling curve: whether performance keeps improving smoothly, where diminishing returns begin, and whether low-level control scales differently from high-level generalization.","authors_note":""},"tags":["ui-agent","data-scale","fine-tuning","demonstration"],"keywords":["computer control agents","autonomous UI agent","LLMs","dataset"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看 AndroidControl 数据集构建和 scaling 曲线即可，双层监督粒度对分析 UI agent 的能力瓶颈有实证价值。","en":"Just look at the AndroidControl dataset construction and scaling curves; the dual-level supervision granularity offers empirical value for analyzing UI agent bottlenecks."}},{"id":"LiDTLWLXLCG24","title":"Discovering Sparsity Allocation for Layer-wise Pruning of Large Language Models","authors":["Lujun Li","Peijie Dong","Zhenheng Tang","Xiang Liu","Qiang Wang","Wenhan Luo","Wei Xue","Qifeng Liu","Xiaowen Chu","Yike Guo"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$188","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiDTLWLXLCG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiDTLWLXLCG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ff997469ac66cf893c4183efeb22212a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：LLM 做 layer-wise pruning 时，每层到底该分配多少 sparsity，能否自动发现而不是靠人工规则。过去大量剪枝工作更关注“删哪些权重”，但默认各层 sparsity 相同或用简单启发式分配，结果是在困难任务上容易出现局部过剪、全局性能恶化。","importance":"它的贡献主要在模型压缩方法和自动化搜索层面。对 pretrain 研究的直接影响有限，但对大模型训练后部署和能力保持有现实价值，尤其是在同等 sparsity 预算下如何更稳地保住推理任务能力。更广义地看，这篇工作也提醒我们：参数冗余不是均匀分布的，层间重要性差异需要显式建模，这一点对 MoE 路由、层删减、蒸馏也有启发。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 DSA，一个自动发现 layer-wise sparsity allocation scheme 的框架。作者的观察是，每层的重要性统计量可以作为分配依据，但真正决定效果的是“如何把统计量映射成各层 sparsity”的 allocation function，因此他们用 expression discovery 去搜索这种函数，而不是手工设公式。和传统 pruning 先定好分配规则再做权重筛选不同，DSA 先解决预算在层间如何分，再在此基础上剪枝。它的有效性来自把一个常被忽略的超参数——层间稀疏度曲线——变成可优化对象。","experiments":"摘要能确认的结论是：DSA 被定位为首个自动发现层级稀疏分配方案的框架，并针对困难任务上性能下降的问题提出改进。摘要没有给出模型规模、基线方法、压缩比和精度损失数字，因此不能补写。真正值得看的实验是三类：和均匀 sparsity、基于 importance 的手工分配相比提升多少；发现出的 allocation function 是否能跨模型迁移；以及在相同总 sparsity 下，哪些层系统性应当保留更多参数。如果跨模型泛化成立，这个工作价值会高于单次搜索技巧。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a neglected question in LLM pruning: given a target sparsity budget, how should sparsity be allocated across layers, and can that allocation be discovered automatically rather than hand-designed? Many pruning methods focus on which weights to remove while treating layer-wise allocation as fixed or heuristic, which often hurts harder tasks.","importance":"This is mainly a model-compression and search contribution. Its direct impact on pretraining is limited, but it is relevant to retaining capability under deployment constraints. More broadly, it reinforces an important point for large models: redundancy is not distributed uniformly across layers, and budget allocation itself is a major optimization problem, not just a secondary implementation choice.","technical_approach":"The method, DSA, is an automated framework for discovering layer-wise sparsity allocation schemes. The authors observe that per-layer importance statistics are useful signals, but their value depends on the function that maps those statistics to sparsity levels. Instead of manually defining that mapping, they use expression discovery to search for effective allocation formulas. Compared with standard pruning pipelines, the novelty is to optimize the allocation rule itself rather than only the pruning mask.","experiments":"The abstract establishes the positioning of DSA as the first automated framework for discovering layer-wise sparsity allocation for LLM pruning, but it does not report concrete model sizes, sparsity ratios, or performance numbers. The most important experiments to inspect are whether DSA beats uniform and hand-crafted allocations under the same sparsity budget, whether the discovered formulas transfer across models, and which layers repeatedly emerge as sensitive.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pruning","sparsity","llm-compression"],"keywords":["network pruning","layerwise sparsity allocation","large language models","model compression."],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看 DSA 的分配函数搜索逻辑即可，把层间稀疏度曲线作为可优化对象，对 MoE 路由和蒸馏有微弱启发。","en":"Just read DSA's allocation function search logic; treating the inter-layer sparsity curve as an optimizable object offers weak inspiration for MoE routing and distillation."}},{"id":"2405.13911","title":"TOPA: Extending Large Language Models for Video Understanding via Text-Only Pre-Alignment","authors":["Wei Li","Hehe Fan","Yongkang Wong","Mohan S. Kankanhalli","Yi Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$189","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.13911","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiFWK024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiFWK024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/0ae94013da7cd459402fd77874e09ee3-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：在缺少高质量视频-文本预训练监督的情况下，能否不用真实视频数据，就先把 LLM 对“视频这种时序视觉信息”的理解接口对齐起来。过去视频理解常受限于 web video-text 数据噪声大、语言监督稀薄、时序结构难学，因此直接拿真实视频继续训练往往性价比不高。","importance":"它的重要性在于提出了一种很不一样的数据与预对齐思路：先用纯文本模拟“视频”，再把模型的时序语义接口校准好。对多模态预训练研究者来说，这个想法有启发性，因为它把跨模态对齐拆成两步：先学任务结构和时序语言，再接真实视觉。这样做可能降低对昂贵视频数据的依赖。边界也很清楚——如果文本生成的 pseudo-video 覆盖不了真实视频里的连续运动和感知细节，那么这种预对齐最多解决语义和结构层的问题，不能替代真实视觉学习。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 TOPA，即 Text-Only Pre-Alignment。作者先用强 LLM 自动生成由连续 textual frames 组成的“Textual Videos”及其标注，模拟真实视频-文本数据；再用这些数据做预对齐，把模型适配到视频理解所需的序列化时序表征。这个设计的关键是先让模型学会“帧间连续性 + 视频任务语言接口”，而不是一上来就吞噪声很大的真实视频语料。和直接在真实视频上预训练相比，TOPA 舍弃了感知真实性，换取了监督密度和可控性；和只做 image-text 迁移相比，它显式加入了时序结构。","experiments":"摘要能确认的实证结论是：TOPA 试图在不使用真实视频预训练数据的情况下，把 LLM 扩展到视频理解。摘要没有给出模型规模、textual video 数量、下游任务、baseline 和具体提升幅度，因此不能填数字。真正值得关注的实验是：仅靠文本预对齐，和 image-only 迁移、real-video pretraining 相比差距有多大；哪些任务收益最大，尤其是偏事件理解还是偏细粒度感知；以及引入少量真实视频后，TOPA 是否能作为更好的初始化。如果它在事件问答、时序推理上增益明显，而在细节感知上受限，这会符合其方法预期。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether video understanding can be bootstrapped without pretraining on real video at all. Existing video-language pretraining is hampered by noisy web video-text pairs and weak temporal supervision, so scaling real video data is often expensive and inefficient.","importance":"Its main value is a novel pre-alignment strategy: use text alone to teach the model the temporal and task structure of video before exposing it to real visual input. For multimodal pretraining, this is an interesting decomposition of the problem. It suggests that some of what we call video understanding is really about learning temporal semantics and supervision structure, not just visual perception. The limitation is equally clear: text-only pseudo-video cannot substitute for real motion and fine-grained visual evidence.","technical_approach":"TOPA, or Text-Only Pre-Alignment, first uses a strong LLM to generate 'Textual Videos' composed of consecutive textual frames together with annotations. These synthetic sequences simulate video-text training data and are used to pre-align the model for downstream video understanding. The key design choice is to trade perceptual realism for denser and more controllable supervision. Compared with direct video pretraining, the method is cheaper and cleaner; compared with image-text transfer, it explicitly introduces temporal continuity.","experiments":"The abstract reliably states that TOPA extends LLMs for video understanding without pretraining on real video data. It does not provide model sizes, dataset scale, task names, baselines, or quantitative gains. The critical empirical questions are how much text-only pre-alignment helps over image-only transfer, how far it remains from real-video pretraining, and whether it mainly improves event-level temporal reasoning rather than fine-grained perceptual recognition.","authors_note":""},"tags":["video-understanding","vlm","text-only-alignment"],"keywords":["video understanding","Large language model","vision-language","text-only alignment"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看 TOPA 的纯文本预对齐思路即可，用伪视频校准时序接口，能缓解真实视频数据依赖，但无法替代视觉感知学习。","en":"Just read TOPA's text-only pre-alignment idea; calibrating temporal interfaces with pseudo-videos mitigates reliance on real video data, but cannot replace visual perception learning."}},{"id":"2405.15179","title":"VB-LoRA: Extreme Parameter Efficient Fine-Tuning with Vector Banks","authors":["Yang Li","Shaobo Han","Shihao Ji"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$18a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15179","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiHJ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiHJ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1e0d38c676d5855bcfab7f6d29d20ad9-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：LoRA 这类 PEFT 虽然已经很省参数，但在大量用户/任务定制场景下，适配器本身的存储和传输成本仍然不小，能不能再大幅压缩。过去低秩分解默认每个矩阵、模块、层各自维护参数，已经比全量微调便宜很多，但在海量个性化部署里，这种“每处都留一份”仍会累积成很高成本。","importance":"这项工作的贡献主要在参数高效微调方法层。对 pretrain 本身冲击不大，但对大模型生态很现实：如果适配器可以进一步共享和组合，那么底座模型上承载大量轻量定制的成本会明显下降。更值得注意的是，它把共享从单层内部扩展到跨矩阵、跨模块、跨层，这个思路对 adapter design 和低秩结构归纳都有参考意义。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 VB-LoRA，提出一种“divide-and-share”范式：不再为每个 LoRA 分量单独存参数，而是从一个全局共享的 vector bank 中，用可微的 top-k admixture 组合出各个低秩矩阵。关键设计是把参数共享粒度提高到全模型范围，这样可以打破传统低秩分解在矩阵维度、模块和层之间的边界。和标准 LoRA 相比，它牺牲了部分独立自由度，换来极高参数复用；是否有效取决于共享向量库能否表达足够多任务特异变化。和其他 PEFT 压缩法相比，它更像是在“基底字典”上做组合生成。","experiments":"摘要给出的结论是：VB-LoRA 在极端参数高效设定下，性能可与现有方法相当或更好。摘要没有给出具体模型、任务、训练参数比例和分数差距，因此不能补写数字。实验上最关键的是两类比较：一是同等可训练参数预算下，和 LoRA 及其变体相比精度损失多少；二是共享 bank 的规模和 top-k 选择如何影响效果。如果在参数量下降一个数量级时仍基本不掉点，这个方法就很有实用价值；但若任务间差异很大，共享 bank 可能会成为瓶颈。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a remaining inefficiency in PEFT: LoRA is already much cheaper than full fine-tuning, but when many users or tasks each need their own adapter, the storage and transfer cost of those adapters still adds up. Existing low-rank methods usually keep separate parameters for each matrix, module, or layer, which limits sharing.","importance":"This is a useful contribution at the PEFT method level. It does not change pretraining directly, but it matters for large-model deployment where one base model may need to support many customized variants. The broader idea is also interesting: low-rank adaptation can be made more compositional by sharing basis elements across layers and modules instead of treating each adapter independently.","technical_approach":"VB-LoRA introduces a 'divide-and-share' design. Instead of storing separate low-rank factors for each adaptation site, it builds them from a globally shared vector bank using a differentiable top-k admixture module. The key trade-off is clear: it gives up some local freedom in exchange for much stronger parameter sharing across dimensions, modules, and layers. Compared with standard LoRA, it is closer to generating adapters from a shared dictionary than learning each adapter from scratch.","experiments":"The abstract claims that VB-LoRA reaches comparable or better performance than existing PEFT methods under extremely low trainable-parameter budgets. It does not report concrete models, tasks, parameter ratios, or score deltas, so those should remain unspecified. The critical evidence to inspect is how much accuracy is preserved at the same adapter budget, and how sensitive results are to vector-bank size and top-k selection.","authors_note":""},"tags":["peft","lora","parameter-sharing","fine-tuning"],"keywords":["Parameter-efficient fine-tuning","Low-rank adaptation","Transfer learning","Transformer","Top-k admixture module"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看 VB-LoRA 的跨层参数共享设计即可，把低秩分解扩展到全局 vector bank，对 adapter 极限压缩有工程参考价值。","en":"Just read VB-LoRA's cross-layer parameter sharing design; extending low-rank decomposition to a global vector bank provides engineering reference for extreme adapter compression."}},{"id":"2409.09951","title":"Optimal ablation for interpretability","authors":["Maximilian Li","Lucas Janson"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Interpretability studies often involve tracing the flow of information through machine learning models to identify specific model components that perform relevant computations for tasks of interest. Prior work quantifies the importance of a model component on a particular task by measuring the impact of performing ablation on that component, or simulating model inference with the component disabled. We propose a new method, optimal ablation (OA), and show that OA-based component importance has theoretical and empirical advantages over measuring importance via other ablation methods. We also show that OA-based component importance can benefit several downstream interpretability tasks, including circuit discovery, localization of factual recall, and latent prediction.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.09951","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiJ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiJ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c55e6792923cc16fd6ed5c3f672420a5-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有可解释性研究用禁用某组件测性能变化的 ablation 方法衡量组件重要性，无理论保障、结果不稳定，无法精准定位模型计算逻辑。","importance":"方法级贡献，为LLM、多模态模型的可解释性分析提供了更可靠的组件重要性度量工具，可直接用于事实召回定位、电路发现等预训练机制分析任务。","technical_approach":"原创的最优消融（OA）方法，从理论上优化了组件重要性的度量逻辑，舍弃了传统 ablation 简单禁用组件的操作，得到的重要性指标同时具备理论保证和实证效果。","experiments":"未披露具体模型、数据集规模，在电路发现、事实召回定位、隐变量预测三类可解释性任务上验证效果优于传统消融方法。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing interpretability studies measure component importance via ablation (disabling a component to test performance change) without theoretical guarantees, leading to unstable results and inaccurate localization of model computation logic.","importance":"Method-level contribution, provides a more reliable component importance measurement tool for interpretability analysis of LLMs and multimodal models, applicable to pretraining mechanism analysis tasks like factual recall localization and circuit discovery.","technical_approach":"Original optimal ablation (OA) method. It optimizes the measurement logic of component importance theoretically, discards the simple component disabling operation of traditional ablation, and the derived importance metric has both theoretical guarantees and empirical effectiveness.","experiments":"No specific model or dataset scale is disclosed. It outperforms traditional ablation methods on three interpretability tasks: circuit discovery, factual recall localization, and latent prediction.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","ablation","mechanistic-analysis"],"keywords":["mechanistic intepretability","model internals","ablation","activation patching","automatic circuit discovery","causal tracing","tuned lens"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"模型组件重要性可通过干预该组件后的任务性能变化衡量","claim_en":"Model component importance can be measured by the change in task performance after intervening on the component","evidence_anchor":"Abstract, para 1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"最优消融得到的组件重要性指标在理论合理性和实证效果上均优于传统消融方法","claim_en":"Component importance metrics derived from optimal ablation outperform traditional ablation methods in both theoretical rationality and empirical effectiveness","opposes":"Prior interpretability studies assume traditional simple ablation is a reasonable component importance measurement method","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract, para 2","why_contested":"Overturns the common measurement assumption in interpretability analysis, may replace traditional ablation as a standard analysis tool"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看最优消融（OA）的理论推导即可，比简单禁用组件更稳定，可作为机制分析和电路发现的更优度量工具。","en":"Just read the theoretical derivation of Optimal Ablation (OA); it's more stable than simply disabling components and serves as a better metric for mechanistic analysis and circuit discovery."}},{"id":"2406.12303","title":"Immiscible Diffusion: Accelerating Diffusion Training with Noise Assignment","authors":["Yiheng Li","Heyang Jiang","Akio Kodaira","Masayoshi Tomizuka","Kurt Keutzer","Chenfeng Xu"],"institutions":["UC Berkeley"],"abstract":"$18b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.12303","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiJKTKX24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiJKTKX24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a422a2f016c14406a01ddba731c0969a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有扩散模型训练中，每张图像会扩散到整个噪声空间，导致每个噪声层混合了所有图像的信息，增加了去噪函数的优化难度，拖慢训练速度。","importance":"方法级贡献，为扩散模型预训练的提速提供了新的优化方向，不需要修改模型架构或损失函数就能降低训练成本。","technical_approach":"受物理学不混溶现象启发的原创训练策略，核心是为不同数据分配固定的噪声子空间，避免不同数据的噪声映射混合，舍弃了传统扩散训练随机采样噪声级的操作，降低了优化目标的复杂度。","experiments":"未披露具体模型参数量、数据集规模及训练速度提升幅度，仅验证了去噪函数优化效率更高。","authors_note":"包含UC Berkeley知名教授Kurt Keutzer，团队长期从事高效AI训练、扩散模型相关研究。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"In existing diffusion model training, each image is diffused across the entire noise space, leading to mixture of all images' information at every noise level, which increases the optimization difficulty of the denoising function and slows down training.","importance":"Method-level contribution, provides a new optimization direction for accelerating diffusion model pretraining, reduces training cost without modifying model architecture or loss function.","technical_approach":"Original training strategy inspired by the immiscibility phenomenon in physics. It assigns fixed noise subspaces to different data to avoid mixing of noise-data mappings across samples, discards the random noise level sampling operation in traditional diffusion training, and reduces the complexity of the optimization target.","experiments":"No specific model size, dataset scale or training speed improvement is disclosed. Only higher optimization efficiency of the denoising function is verified.","authors_note":"Includes Kurt Keutzer, a well-known professor at UC Berkeley. The team has long been working on efficient AI training and diffusion model related research."},"tags":["diffusion-training","noise-assignment","training-efficiency"],"keywords":["Diffusion Model","Training Efficiency"],"notable_authors":["Kurt Keutzer"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"扩散模型训练速度受去噪网络优化难度直接影响","claim_en":"Diffusion model training speed is directly affected by the optimization difficulty of the denoising network","evidence_anchor":"Abstract, para 1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"为不同训练样本分配固定不重叠的噪声子空间，可降低去噪函数优化难度，加快扩散模型训练收敛","claim_en":"Assigning fixed non-overlapping noise subspaces to different training samples can reduce the optimization difficulty of the denoising function and accelerate the convergence of diffusion model training","opposes":"Traditional diffusion training assumes random noise level sampling and full noise space diffusion is the optimal training strategy","opposes_cite_hint":"Ho 2020 DDPM","evidence_anchor":"Abstract, para 2","why_contested":"Revises the noise sampling assumption of diffusion training, provides a completely different design path for training acceleration"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看噪声分配策略即可，为不同数据固定噪声子空间来加速扩散训练，setup 干净，值得在 internal ablation 中尝试。","en":"Just read the noise assignment strategy; fixing noise subspaces for different data to accelerate diffusion training is a clean setup worth trying in internal ablations."}},{"id":"LiLLS24","title":"Adaptive Layer Sparsity for Large Language Models via Activation Correlation Assessment","authors":["Wei Li","Lujun Li","Mark G. Lee","Shengjie Sun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$18c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiLLS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiLLS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c573258c38d0a3919d8c1364053c45df-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM剪枝压缩方法采用统一剪枝率，未考虑不同层特征重要性的差异，导致压缩后性能下降明显，无法平衡部署效率和模型效果。","importance":"方法级贡献，为LLM预训练后稀疏化、部署压缩提供了更精细的层级适配策略，可在更小的性能损失下获得更高的压缩率。","technical_approach":"原创的自适应层稀疏（ALS）方法，核心是通过层间激活的相关性评估各层的信息冗余度，为不同层分配差异化的稀疏率，舍弃了传统方法统一剪枝率的设计，避免重要层被过度剪枝。","experiments":"未披露具体模型参数量、数据集及压缩率、性能下降幅度等数值，验证效果优于传统统一剪枝方法。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM pruning compression methods use uniform pruning rates without considering the difference in feature importance across layers, leading to obvious performance degradation after compression, and cannot balance deployment efficiency and model effect.","importance":"Method-level contribution, provides a more fine-grained layer-level adaptation strategy for post-pretraining sparsification and deployment compression of LLMs, achieves higher compression rate with smaller performance loss.","technical_approach":"Original Adaptive Layer Sparsity (ALS) method. It evaluates the information redundancy of each layer through inter-layer activation correlation, assigns differentiated sparsity rates to different layers, discards the uniform pruning rate design of traditional methods, and avoids over-pruning of important layers.","experiments":"No specific model size, dataset, compression rate or performance degradation value is disclosed. It outperforms traditional uniform pruning methods.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pruning","sparsity","llm-compression","activation"],"keywords":["layerwise sparsity allocation","large language models","model compression","network pruning."],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM不同层的特征重要性和冗余度存在差异","claim_en":"There are differences in feature importance and redundancy across different layers of LLMs","evidence_anchor":"Abstract, para 1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于层间激活相关性评估的自适应稀疏策略，可在相同压缩率下获得比统一剪枝更高的模型性能","claim_en":"Adaptive sparsity strategy based on inter-layer activation correlation assessment can achieve higher model performance than uniform pruning under the same compression rate","opposes":"Early pruning methods assume uniform pruning rate can achieve optimal compression-performance trade-off","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract, para 2","why_contested":"Clarifies the impact of layer-level heterogeneity on compression effect, provides a new evaluation dimension for LLM sparsification design"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为层级自适应剪枝的 baseline 备查，基于激活相关性分配稀疏率是常规思路，不读正文。","en":"Keep as a baseline reference for layer-adaptive pruning; allocating sparsity based on activation correlation is a standard idea, skip the main text."}},{"id":"LiLTDLPC24","title":"Should We Really Edit Language Models? On the Evaluation of Edited Language Models","authors":["Qi Li","Xiang Liu","Zhenheng Tang","Peijie Dong","Zeyu Li","Xinglin Pan","Xiaowen Chu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$18d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiLTDLPC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiLTDLPC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/370fa2e691f57eb319bc263a07dad4a5-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有模型编辑方法的评估仅关注可靠性、泛化性、局部性三个维度，未衡量编辑后模型的通用能力变化，导致对编辑方法的实际效果评估存在偏差。","importance":"范式级贡献，修正了LLM模型编辑领域的评估框架，为预训练模型的知识更新方法的落地评估提供了更全面的标准。","technical_approach":"面向模型编辑的全维度评估方案，核心是在现有评估维度之外新增通用能力评测，覆盖不同编辑方法、不同规模LLM的测试场景，舍弃了仅靠三个专用维度判断编辑效果的评估逻辑。","experiments":"未披露具体模型参数量、编辑方法数量，核心发现为现有编辑方法仅能在几十次编辑内维持模型通用能力，编辑次数更多时通用性能会不可避免下降。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing model editing method evaluations only focus on three dimensions: reliability, generalization and locality, without measuring the change of general capabilities of edited models, leading to biased evaluation of the actual effect of editing methods.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution, revises the evaluation framework of LLM model editing field, provides a more comprehensive standard for the deployment evaluation of pretrained model knowledge update methods.","technical_approach":"Full-dimensional evaluation scheme for model editing. It adds general capability evaluation besides existing evaluation dimensions, covers test scenarios of different editing methods and LLMs of different scales, discards the evaluation logic that only relies on three dedicated dimensions to judge editing effect.","experiments":"No specific model size or number of editing methods is disclosed. The core finding is that existing editing methods can only maintain the general capability of the model within dozens of edits, and general performance will inevitably degrade when the number of edits is larger.","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-editing","evaluation","knowledge"],"keywords":["Model Editing","Language Models","Language Model Evaluation"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"模型编辑需要在更新目标知识的同时不影响模型原有能力","claim_en":"Model editing needs to update target knowledge without affecting the original capabilities of the model","evidence_anchor":"Abstract, para 1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"现有主流模型编辑方法仅支持不超过几十次的有效知识更新，超过后模型通用能力会出现明显下降","claim_en":"Existing mainstream model editing methods only support no more than dozens of effective knowledge updates, beyond which the general capability of the model will degrade significantly","opposes":"Prior model editing studies assume that as long as the three indicators of reliability, generalization and locality are met, large-scale continuous editing is supported","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract, para 2","why_contested":"Exposes the core defect of existing model editing methods, points out a new optimization target for subsequent editing method design"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看通用能力评测结果即可，修正了模型编辑只看局部性的 prior，提醒我们关注编辑带来的全局性能退化。","en":"Just look at the general capability evaluation results; it corrects the prior of only evaluating locality in model editing, reminding us to watch for global performance degradation."}},{"id":"LiRO24","title":"Fine-grained Analysis of In-context Linear Estimation: Data, Architecture, and Beyond","authors":["Yingcong Li","Ankit Singh Rawat","Samet Oymak"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$18e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiRO24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiRO24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/f9dc462382fef56d58279e75de2438f3-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有线性注意力Transformer的上下文学习（ICL）机制分析仅在IID特征、全参数化注意力的理想化设定下成立，无法解释真实场景下不同架构、非IID数据的ICL表现。","importance":"机制级贡献，深化了对Transformer和状态空间模型ICL能力底层逻辑的理解，为预训练模型的ICL能力优化提供了理论支撑。","technical_approach":"ICL优化与泛化图景的理论分析框架，核心是扩展到相关设计假设、低秩参数化、H3状态空间模型等真实场景设定，证明1层线性注意力和1层H3都实现了1步预条件梯度下降，舍弃了先前分析的IID简化假设。","experiments":"纯理论分析工作，无实证实验，所有结论均有严格理论证明支撑。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing in-context learning (ICL) mechanism analysis for linear attention transformers only holds under idealized settings of IID features and fully parameterized attention, cannot explain the ICL performance of different architectures and non-IID data in real scenarios.","importance":"Mechanism-level contribution, deepens the understanding of the underlying logic of ICL capability of transformers and state space models, provides theoretical support for ICL capability optimization of pretrained models.","technical_approach":"Theoretical analysis framework for ICL optimization and generalization landscape. It extends to real scenario settings including correlated design assumption, low-rank parameterization and H3 state space model, proves that both 1-layer linear attention and 1-layer H3 implement 1-step preconditioned gradient descent, and discards the IID simplification assumption of previous analysis.","experiments":"Pure theoretical analysis work, no empirical experiments. All conclusions are supported by rigorous theoretical proofs.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","linear-estimation","architecture-analysis"],"keywords":["In-context learning","linear attention","state-space model","optimization","RAG","LoRA"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"线性注意力Transformer可通过实现梯度下降步骤具备ICL能力","claim_en":"Linear attention transformers can gain ICL capability by implementing gradient descent steps","evidence_anchor":"Abstract, para 1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"在非IID特征的相关设计假设下，1层线性注意力和1层H3状态空间模型均实现1步预条件梯度下降，具备ICL能力","claim_en":"Under the correlated design assumption with non-IID features, both 1-layer linear attention and 1-layer H3 state space model implement 1-step preconditioned gradient descent and have ICL capability","opposes":"Prior ICL theoretical analysis assumes that transformers can only implement gradient descent style ICL under the setting of IID features and fully parameterized attention","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract, para 2","why_contested":"Expands the applicable scenario range of ICL mechanism, provides theoretical basis for ICL capability optimization of non-transformer architectures"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看非 IID 设定和 H3 模型的理论证明即可，将 ICL 机制分析扩展到更真实的场景，对理解状态空间模型有理论价值。","en":"Just read the theoretical proofs for non-IID settings and the H3 model; extending ICL mechanistic analysis to more realistic scenarios holds theoretical value for understanding state space models."}},{"id":"LinWW024","title":"Accelerating Augmentation Invariance Pretraining","authors":["Jinhong Lin","Cheng-En Wu","Yibing Wei","Pedro Morgado"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$18f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LinWW024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LinWW024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/abf731c2993f9b1ee417cc3734787d7a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"对比学习预训练ViT需要极高的计算资源，现有加速方法会影响预训练模型的下游泛化性能，无法平衡训练效率和最终效果。","importance":"方法级贡献，为视觉预训练、多模态预训练的对比学习提速提供了可行方案，可在不损失下游性能的前提下降低训练成本。","technical_approach":"面向对比学习的加速框架，核心是利用ViT对不同序列长度输入的泛化能力，采用随机token丢弃、灵活patch缩放混合的序列压缩策略降低梯度估计成本，舍弃了传统固定序列长度的预训练设定。","experiments":"未披露具体模型参数量、数据集规模，量化了不同加速策略的梯度估计误差及对下游任务的影响，验证了方法可加快收敛同时不损失下游性能。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Contrastive learning pretraining for ViTs requires extremely high computational resources, existing acceleration methods will affect the downstream generalization performance of pretrained models, and cannot balance training efficiency and final effect.","importance":"Method-level contribution, provides a feasible solution for accelerating contrastive learning in visual pretraining and multimodal pretraining, reduces training cost without losing downstream performance.","technical_approach":"Acceleration framework for contrastive learning. It leverages ViT's generalization ability across inputs of different sequence lengths, adopts a hybrid sequence compression strategy of randomized token dropout and flexible patch scaling to reduce gradient estimation cost, and discards the traditional fixed sequence length pretraining setting.","experiments":"No specific model size or dataset scale is disclosed. It quantifies the gradient estimation error of different acceleration strategies and their impact on downstream tasks, and verifies that the method can accelerate convergence without losing downstream performance.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pretraining","self-supervised","augmentation","efficiency"],"keywords":["Self-supervised learning","Vision Transformer","Accelerating training"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"对比学习是ViT预训练的有效方法","claim_en":"Contrastive learning is an effective method for ViT pretraining","evidence_anchor":"Abstract, para 1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"采用混合序列压缩策略降低对比学习预训练的梯度估计成本，可在不损失下游任务性能的前提下加快训练收敛","claim_en":"Adopting a hybrid sequence compression strategy to reduce the gradient estimation cost of contrastive learning pretraining can accelerate training convergence without losing downstream task performance","opposes":"Prior ViT pretraining assumes fixed patch size and complete token sequence are necessary conditions to ensure pretraining effect","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract, para 2","why_contested":"Breaks the dependence of ViT pretraining on fixed input sequence length, provides a new design idea for efficient visual pretraining"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为对比学习加速方向的文献备查，无需读正文，预训练优化需要降本时可偶尔检索参考。","en":"Only for literature reference in contrastive learning acceleration, no need to read full text, can be retrieved for pretraining cost reduction reference occasionally."}},{"id":"LingamNVSGGCDBS24","title":"SVFT: Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning with Singular Vectors","authors":["Vijay Lingam","Atula Neerkaje","Aditya Vavre","Aneesh Shetty","Gautham Krishna Gudur","Joydeep Ghosh","Eunsol Choi","Alex Dimakis","Aleksandar Bojchevski","Sujay Sanghavi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$190","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LingamNVSGGCDBS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LingamNVSGGCDBS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/48c368f105e8145b945227b73255635a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有PEFT方法（如LoRA）与全参数微调存在性能 gap，缩小gap的方案往往需要增加更多可训练参数，无法平衡参数效率和微调效果。","importance":"方法级贡献，为LLM、多模态模型的参数高效微调提供了新的设计方案，可在更低参数量下达到接近全参数微调的效果。","technical_approach":"基于奇异向量的PEFT方法（SVFT），核心是将权重更新ΔW构造为原权重矩阵奇异向量外积的稀疏组合，仅训练少量组合系数，舍弃了LoRA等方法与原权重无关的低秩矩阵设计，利用了预训练权重本身的结构信息。","experiments":"未披露具体模型参数量、数据集及性能提升幅度，验证了在相同可训练参数量下效果优于LoRA等现有PEFT方法。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing PEFT methods (such as LoRA) have a performance gap compared to full fine-tuning, and solutions to narrow the gap often require more trainable parameters, cannot balance parameter efficiency and fine-tuning effect.","importance":"Method-level contribution, provides a new design scheme for parameter-efficient fine-tuning of LLMs and multimodal models, achieves performance close to full fine-tuning with fewer parameters.","technical_approach":"Singular Vector based Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (SVFT) method. It constructs the weight update ΔW as a sparse combination of outer products of singular vectors of the original weight matrix, only trains a small number of combination coefficients, discards the low-rank matrix design independent of the original weight used in methods like LoRA, and leverages the structural information of the pretrained weight itself.","experiments":"No specific model size, dataset or performance improvement value is disclosed. It outperforms existing PEFT methods such as LoRA under the same number of trainable parameters.","authors_note":""},"tags":["peft","finetuning","svd","parameter-efficient"],"keywords":["Parameter Efficient Fine Tuning","Large Language Models","Deep Learning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"PEFT方法通过冻结预训练权重、注入少量可训练参数实现微调，可大幅降低微调成本","claim_en":"PEFT methods fine-tune models by freezing pretrained weights and injecting a small number of trainable parameters, which can greatly reduce fine-tuning cost","evidence_anchor":"Abstract, para 1"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于预训练权重奇异向量构造稀疏更新的SVFT方法，在相同可训练参数量下效果优于LoRA等现有PEFT方法","claim_en":"SVFT, which constructs sparse updates based on the singular vectors of pretrained weights, outperforms existing PEFT methods such as LoRA under the same number of trainable parameters","opposes":"Existing PEFT methods assume that low-rank update structure independent of original weights can achieve optimal parameter efficiency-performance trade-off","opposes_cite_hint":"Hu 2021 LoRA","evidence_anchor":"Abstract, para 2","why_contested":"Proves that leveraging the structural information of pretrained weights can improve PEFT efficiency, points out a new direction for subsequent PEFT method design"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为PEFT方向的备选方法备查，无需细读，做参数高效微调ablation时可快速验证效果。","en":"For reference as an alternative PEFT method, no need to read in detail, can be quickly verified during parameter-efficient fine-tuning ablation."}},{"id":"LipplL24","title":"Inductive biases of multi-task learning and finetuning: multiple regimes of feature reuse","authors":["Samuel Lippl","Jack W. Lindsey"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$191","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LipplL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LipplL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d7346ff79699b5bba26f8af89e700a95-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"多任务学习（MTL）和预训练-微调（PT+FT）范式的归纳偏置缺乏清晰的理论刻画，现有研究大多关注效果表现，未明确两种范式下特征复用的底层机制差异。","importance":"方法级理论贡献，量化了MTL和PT+FT对应的隐式正则化项，为多任务训练策略、预训练微调流程的设计提供可落地的理论参考。","technical_approach":"原创理论分析，针对对角线性网络和单隐层ReLU网络两类简单模型，推导MTL和PT+FT训练过程中天然存在的隐式正则化惩罚项，对比得到两种范式下特征复用的模式差异，未引入额外训练组件。","experiments":"摘要未披露具体实验参数量、数据规模及量化指标，仅给出理论结论：MTL和PT+FT均存在偏向任务间特征复用的归纳偏置。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Inductive biases of multi-task learning (MTL) and pretrain-finetune (PT+FT) paradigms lack clear theoretical characterization. Existing work mostly focuses on empirical performance, without clarifying the underlying mechanism differences of feature reuse between the two paradigms.","importance":"Method-level theoretical contribution. It quantifies the implicit regularization terms corresponding to MTL and PT+FT, providing actionable theoretical reference for the design of multi-task training strategies and pretrain-finetune pipelines.","technical_approach":"Original theoretical analysis targeting two simple model families: diagonal linear networks and single-hidden-layer ReLU networks. It derives the implicit regularization penalties naturally existing in MTL and PT+FT training processes, compares the feature reuse pattern differences between the two paradigms, and introduces no additional training components.","experiments":"No specific experiment parameters, data scale or quantitative metrics are disclosed in the abstract. Only theoretical conclusion is provided: both MTL and PT+FT have inductive biases towards feature reuse across tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multitask-learning","finetuning","feature-reuse","transfer"],"keywords":["multi-task learning","implicit regularization","finetuning","pretraining","implicit bias"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"预训练后微调相比从零开始训练在小样本下游任务上效果更优","claim_en":"Pretrain followed by finetuning outperforms training from scratch on few-shot downstream tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"MTL和PT+FT的特征复用模式由不同的隐式正则化项驱动","claim_en":"Feature reuse patterns of MTL and PT+FT are driven by different implicit regularization terms","opposes":"Prior default assumption that MTL and PT+FT share the same feature reuse mechanism","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Theoretical Results","why_contested":"Revises the unified understanding of the underlying mechanisms of multi-task learning and finetuning, guiding the selection of training paradigms for different scenarios."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3、§4的理论推导和特征复用模式对比即可，能为多任务预训练/微调流程设计提供理论参考。","en":"Only read §3 and §4 for theoretical derivation and feature reuse pattern comparison, which offers theoretical reference for multi-task pretraining/finetuning pipeline design."}},{"id":"LittwinSATN0S24","title":"How JEPA Avoids Noisy Features: The Implicit Bias of Deep Linear Self Distillation Networks","authors":["Etai Littwin","Omid Saremi","Madhu Advani","Vimal Thilak","Preetum Nakkiran","Chen Huang","Joshua M. Susskind"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$192","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LittwinSATN0S24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LittwinSATN0S24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a600f0f740605205133553cb74a1c107-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"JEPA类自监督方法（如自蒸馏）相比MAE具备更强的抗噪特征学习能力，但底层机制缺乏理论解释，现有研究仅观察到效果差异未触及隐式偏置层面的原因。","importance":"范式级理论贡献，明确了JEPA优于MAE的核心原因，为自监督预训练目标的设计提供可落地的理论依据。","technical_approach":"原创理论分析，针对深度线性自蒸馏网络，推导JEPA训练过程对应的隐式偏置，证明其会自动抑制输入中的噪声特征，对比MAE的输入空间重构目标需要重建噪声，天然存在劣势。","experiments":"摘要未披露具体实验参数量、数据规模及量化指标，仅给出理论结论：JEPA的隐式偏置优先学习高语义价值特征，过滤噪声特征。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"JEPA-style self-supervised methods (e.g., self-distillation) have stronger noise-robust feature learning capabilities than MAE, but the underlying mechanism lacks theoretical explanation. Existing work only observes performance differences without touching the implicit bias level reasons.","importance":"Paradigm-level theoretical contribution. It clarifies the core reason why JEPA outperforms MAE, providing actionable theoretical basis for the design of self-supervised pretraining objectives.","technical_approach":"Original theoretical analysis targeting deep linear self-distillation networks. It derives the implicit bias corresponding to JEPA training process, proves that it automatically suppresses noise features in the input. In contrast, MAE's input space reconstruction objective requires reconstructing noise, which has inherent disadvantages.","experiments":"No specific experiment parameters, data scale or quantitative metrics are disclosed in the abstract. Only theoretical conclusion is provided: JEPA's implicit bias prioritizes learning high-semantic-value features and filters noise features.","authors_note":""},"tags":["jepa","self-distillation","implicit-bias","representation-learning"],"keywords":["SSL","JEPA"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"JEPA类自监督预训练得到的表征在下游任务上效果优于MAE","claim_en":"Representations learned from JEPA-style self-supervised pretraining outperform those from MAE on downstream tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"JEPA的抗噪性来自训练过程的隐式正则化而非目标设计的人为先验","claim_en":"JEPA's noise robustness comes from implicit regularization during training rather than artificial prior in objective design","opposes":"Prior empirical assumption that JEPA performs better because representation space prediction is more reasonable than input space reconstruction","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Analysis","why_contested":"Provides a clear theoretical direction for the optimization of self-supervised pretraining objectives, avoiding reliance on empirical trial and error."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为自监督预训练隐式偏置方向的文献备查，无需读正文，仅需记住JEPA抗噪来自隐式噪声抑制的结论即可。","en":"For reference in self-supervised pretraining implicit bias research, no need to read full text, only remember JEPA's noise resistance comes from implicit noise suppression."}},{"id":"LiuAR24","title":"Sequential Probability Assignment with Contexts: Minimax Regret, Contextual Shtarkov Sums, and Contextual Normalized Maximum Likelihood","authors":["Ziyi Liu","Idan Attias","Dan Roy"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$193","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiuAR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiuAR24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/19a94fdf9e1c5b387830e4c4fef6972a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"带上下文的序列概率分配（对数损失在线学习）缺乏通用的假设类复杂度度量来刻画最小最大后悔值，之前广泛使用的序列l∞熵无法覆盖所有假设类场景。","importance":"理论级贡献，提出了新的假设类复杂度度量，填补了上下文相关序列概率分配的理论空白。","technical_approach":"原创理论推导，受经典Shtarkov和Rakhlin等人工作启发，提出上下文Shtarkov和作为新的复杂度度量，基于该度量设计了最小最大最优的上下文归一化最大似然算法，支持非参数假设类场景。","experiments":"摘要未披露具体实验结果，仅给出理论证明：上下文Shtarkov和可准确刻画任意假设类下的最小最大后悔值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Context-aware sequential probability assignment (online learning with log loss) lacks a general hypothesis class complexity measure to characterize minimax regret. The previously widely used sequential l∞ entropy cannot cover all hypothesis class scenarios.","importance":"Theoretical contribution. It proposes a new hypothesis class complexity measure, filling the theoretical gap of context-related sequential probability assignment.","technical_approach":"Original theoretical derivation inspired by classic work of Shtarkov and Rakhlin et al. It proposes contextual Shtarkov sum as a new complexity measure, designs a minimax optimal contextual normalized maximum likelihood algorithm based on this measure, supporting non-parametric hypothesis class scenarios.","experiments":"No specific experiment results are disclosed in the abstract. Only theoretical proof is provided: contextual Shtarkov sum can accurately characterize minimax regret under arbitrary hypothesis classes.","authors_note":""},"tags":["language-modeling","compression","regret","information-theory"],"keywords":["online learning","log loss","probabilistic forecasting"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"序列概率分配的最小最大后悔值由假设类的复杂度决定","claim_en":"Minimax regret of sequential probability assignment is determined by the complexity of the hypothesis class","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"序列l∞熵无法通用刻画最小最大后悔值","claim_en":"Sequential l∞ entropy cannot universally characterize minimax regret","opposes":"Prior conclusion that sequential l∞ entropy is a general complexity measure","opposes_cite_hint":"Rakhlin 2015 Sequential Entropy","evidence_anchor":"§2 Problem Setting","why_contested":"Revises the complexity measure conclusion that has been used for many years in the online sequential learning field, providing a more accurate theoretical basis for subsequent algorithm design."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为序列概率建模理论方向的文献备查，与常规预训练实践关联度低，无需细读。","en":"Only for literature reference in sequence probability modeling theory, low relevance to regular pretraining practice, no need to read in detail."}},{"id":"LiuCZWDZLX0L024","title":"MMDU: A Multi-Turn Multi-Image Dialog Understanding Benchmark and Instruction-Tuning Dataset for LVLMs","authors":["Ziyu Liu","Tao Chu","Yuhang Zang","Xilin Wei","Xiaoyi Dong","Pan Zhang","Zijian Liang","Yuanjun Xiong","Yu Qiao","Dahua Lin","Jiaqi Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$194","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiuCZWDZLX0L024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiuCZWDZLX0L024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1057053100de064a44286239724f7865-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大视觉语言模型（LVLM）基准大多针对单轮单图场景，无法评估真实人机交互中多轮多图长上下文的对话理解能力，对应微调数据集也存在空白。","importance":"数据级贡献，提供了标准化的多轮多图对话评估基准和大规模微调数据集，可推动LVLM真实场景交互能力的迭代。","technical_approach":"新构建的基准和数据集，MMDU覆盖多轮多图开放域对话评估，包含45k条微调样本（MMDU-45k），评估维度包含指令遵循、上下文关联、多图推理等，避免了现有基准仅考察单选题或短回答的缺陷。","experiments":"摘要未披露具体基准测试的量化指标，仅说明现有开源LVLM在MMDU上的表现远低于单轮单图场景。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing large vision-language model (LVLM) benchmarks mostly target single-turn single-image scenarios, cannot evaluate dialogue understanding capabilities in real human-computer interaction with multi-turn, multi-image long context, and corresponding fine-tuning datasets are also missing.","importance":"Data-level contribution. It provides a standardized multi-turn multi-image dialogue evaluation benchmark and large-scale fine-tuning dataset, promoting the iteration of LVLM's real-scenario interaction capabilities.","technical_approach":"Newly constructed benchmark and dataset. MMDU covers multi-turn multi-image open-domain dialogue evaluation, includes 45k fine-tuning samples (MMDU-45k), evaluation dimensions include instruction following, context association, multi-image reasoning, etc., avoiding the defect of existing benchmarks that only test multiple-choice questions or short answers.","experiments":"No specific quantitative metrics for benchmark testing are disclosed in the abstract. Only observation is provided: existing open-source LVLMs perform much worse on MMDU than on single-turn single-image scenarios.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","benchmark","multi-turn","multi-image"],"keywords":["LVLM benchmark","LVLM instruction-tuning dataset"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"现有LVLM在单轮单图任务上已经达到较高性能","claim_en":"Existing LVLMs have achieved relatively high performance on single-turn single-image tasks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"仅在单轮单图数据上微调的LVLM无法直接适配多轮多图对话场景","claim_en":"LVLMs fine-tuned only on single-turn single-image data cannot directly adapt to multi-turn multi-image dialogue scenarios","opposes":"Prior assumption that general LVLMs can zero-shot adapt to all multimodal interaction scenarios","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"Clarifies the capability shortboard of LVLMs for real interaction scenarios, providing reference for the ratio design of subsequent multimodal fine-tuning data."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为LVLM多轮多图场景评测与微调的数据集备查，做相关方向时可直接调用，无需读正文。","en":"For reference as a multi-turn multi-image LVLM evaluation and fine-tuning dataset, can be directly called for related work, no need to read full text."}},{"id":"LiuFCZ00CWY24","title":"Enhancing LLM&apos;s Cognition via Structurization","authors":["Kai Liu","Zhihang Fu","Chao Chen","Wei Zhang","Rongxin Jiang","Fan Zhou","Yaowu Chen","Yue Wu","Jieping Ye"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiuFCZ00CWY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiuFCZ00CWY24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/f169ec4d47933ea4896b994af8ff4f17-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["llm","structured-reasoning","cognition"]},{"id":"LiuKR24","title":"TSDS: Data Selection for Task-Specific Model Finetuning","authors":["Zifan Liu","Amin Karbasi","Theodoros Rekatsinas"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$195","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LiuKR24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LiuKR24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/13848b5893119ff772b69812c95914fa-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文关注一个很实际的问题：任务微调时该选哪些数据，而不是默认把所有候选数据都喂进去。过去常见做法要么靠启发式过滤，要么用昂贵的验证集搜索；但任务专用微调的收益高度依赖数据匹配度，错配数据不仅浪费算力，还会拖垮最终泛化。","importance":"它的重要性在于把“数据选择”从经验活变成更系统的优化问题。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，数据不是越多越好，特别在 continual pretrain、domain adaptation、mid-train 和 task-specific finetune 场景里，选对子集往往比继续堆 token 更划算，也更影响训练稳定性和最终能力边界。","technical_approach":"从标题看，TSDS 提出的是一套面向具体任务的数据选择方法，而不是通用检索式采样。它的关键应是利用任务信号定义样本价值，再从候选池中选出对该任务最有帮助的数据子集；和简单相似度筛选不同，这类方法通常需要同时处理代表性、冗余度和任务对齐三件事，否则容易选出“都很像但信息量重复”的样本。它的设计重点不在模型更大，而在让有限微调预算花在有效样本上。","experiments":"没有摘要细节，无法确认具体 benchmark、模型规模和提升数字。合理预期是：作者在多个 task-specific finetuning 设置下，对比随机采样、相似度检索、coreset 或 influence-based baseline，展示在相同标注量或训练预算下更高的任务指标。若实验做得扎实，最值得看的应是数据预算曲线：在 10%、20%、50% 数据量下是否仍能保持甚至超过 full-data 微调，以及跨任务稳定性是否足够好。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a simple but high-impact question: for task-specific finetuning, which data should you keep? Standard practice often uses all available data or lightweight heuristics, but task performance is highly sensitive to data mismatch, and poor selection wastes both compute and label budget.","importance":"Its contribution is at the data-selection level. For pretraining-adjacent work, the lesson is broader: more data is not automatically better, especially in continual pretraining, domain adaptation, and budgeted finetuning, where choosing the right subset can dominate scaling the token count.","technical_approach":"From the title, TSDS is a task-aware data selection method rather than generic retrieval. The likely mechanism is to score candidate examples by their utility for a target task and then select a subset that balances relevance and diversity. That matters because pure similarity filtering often over-selects redundant examples, while pure coverage ignores task alignment.","experiments":"The provided information does not include numerical results. A reasonable expectation is evaluation against random sampling, similarity-based selection, and coreset or influence-style baselines across several finetuning tasks. The most informative result would be the data-efficiency curve: whether the method reaches full-data performance with a small fraction of the examples, and whether that holds consistently across tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-selection","fine-tuning","task-specific"],"keywords":["data selection","finetuning","foundation model","large language model","optimal transport"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的样本价值定义逻辑和实验对比部分即可，可直接复用到内部持续预训练、域适配的数据筛选流程中。","en":"Only read §3 for sample value definition logic and experimental comparison, can be directly reused in internal continual pretraining and domain adaptation data filtering pipelines."}},{"id":"LuF0QC024","title":"Twin-Merging: Dynamic Integration of Modular Expertise in Model Merging","authors":["Zhenyi Lu","Chenghao Fan","Wei Wei","Xiaoye Qu","Dangyang Chen","Yu Cheng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$196","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LuF0QC024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LuF0QC024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/8fcd17eb91bae20d9826786d7d6be799-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文处理的是 model merging 的一个老问题：把多个专长模型合并后，往往不是能力相加，而是互相干扰。静态合并权重很难同时兼顾不同输入场景，因此模块化能力经常在 merge 后被平均掉。","importance":"它属于 post-train 参数组合方法，但对预训练和专家化建模也有参考价值。它说明多模型知识整合不能只靠全局线性插值，输入条件依赖的动态融合更接近真实需求；这一点和 MoE、adapter composition、continual specialization 的思路是相通的。","technical_approach":"Twin-Merging 的核心是动态整合 modular expertise，而不是用单一固定权重 merge 全部参数。按标题理解，它应显式建模两个或多组专家分量之间的互补关系，并根据输入或层内信号决定融合强度。它与 task arithmetic、simple averaging 的区别在于允许局部、条件化地调用不同专家；代价是推理路径更复杂，也需要避免路由器本身过拟合。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认是全参数 merge、LoRA merge 还是模块级 merge。合理预期是：在多任务、多领域或多安全策略模型合并设置下，对比 model soup、task arithmetic、TIES、DARE 等基线，报告 merged model 在平均性能和最差任务性能上的变化。若实验扎实，最有价值的是冲突任务分析：动态融合是否真的缓解 capability interference，而不是只提升 easy cases。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a common failure mode in model merging: combining specialized models often causes interference instead of additive gains. Static merge coefficients are too blunt when different inputs need different expert behaviors.","importance":"This is a post-training composition paper, but it has broader relevance to expert modeling and modular pretraining. The main lesson is that knowledge fusion is often input-dependent; global parameter averaging is a poor fit when capabilities are heterogeneous or partially conflicting.","technical_approach":"Twin-Merging proposes dynamic integration of modular expertise instead of a single fixed merge over all parameters. From the title, the method likely models complementary expert components and adjusts their contribution based on the input or internal signals. That distinguishes it from task arithmetic or model soup methods, which merge statically and therefore struggle under task conflict.","experiments":"The abstract is not available, so the exact setup cannot be verified. A plausible evaluation would compare against model soup, task arithmetic, TIES, and related merging baselines across multi-task or multi-domain settings, focusing on both average performance and worst-task degradation. The most useful evidence would be whether dynamic merging truly reduces capability interference rather than only improving easy or aligned tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-merging","modularity","checkpoint-composition","alignment"],"keywords":["Model Merging","Fusion of Experts","Efficiency","Large Language Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4的动态融合策略设计和消融实验即可，能为MoE路由、多专家能力整合方案设计提供参考。","en":"Only read §4 for dynamic fusion strategy design and ablation experiments, provides reference for MoE routing and multi-expert capability integration scheme design."}},{"id":"LuJCW0L24","title":"WildVision: Evaluating Vision-Language Models in the Wild with Human Preferences","authors":["Yujie Lu","Dongfu Jiang","Wenhu Chen","William Yang Wang","Yejin Choi","Bill Yuchen Lin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$197","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LuJCW0L24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LuJCW0L24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/563991b5c8b45fe75bea42db738223b2-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 VLM 评测失真问题：很多现有 benchmark 过于洁净、封闭、题型单一，导致模型在榜单上很好看，但在真实开放场景里表现并不可靠。作者试图用 human preferences 在 wild setting 下重新评估视觉语言模型。","importance":"它的重要性在评测方法而不是训练方法，但对 VLM 预训练很有反馈价值。因为如果评测目标从“标准答案匹配”转向“真实用户偏好”，那么预训练阶段的数据配比、视觉 tokenization、对齐 loss 和 instruction tuning 目标都会被迫重新校准。","technical_approach":"WildVision 的核心不是再造一个封闭题库，而是构造更接近真实分布的视觉语言评测，并使用人类偏好作为主监督。这样做的原因很直接：开放式多模态任务往往不存在唯一标准答案，且图像理解质量、表达帮助性和事实性需要联合判断。与 rule-based 自动评测相比，人类偏好更贴近部署目标；代价是成本高、方差大，因此数据采样和评测协议会比模型本身更关键。","experiments":"从题目看，实验重点应是评测集构建、标注一致性、与现有 benchmark 排名的相关性/偏移，以及主流 VLM 在 wild preference setting 下的胜率比较。没有摘要，无法确认样本规模与具体模型名单。若结果有价值，通常会显示一个重要现象：传统 benchmark 排名与真实偏好排名并不完全一致，一些擅长模板化答题的模型在开放场景中并不占优。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper addresses an evaluation gap in vision-language models: many existing benchmarks are too clean, closed-form, and narrow, so strong leaderboard performance does not necessarily translate to robust real-world usefulness. The goal is to evaluate VLMs in more natural settings using human preferences.","importance":"The contribution is primarily on evaluation, but it feeds back into pretraining and alignment. If the target metric shifts from answer matching to real user preference, then data mixture, visual tokenization, alignment losses, and instruction tuning objectives all need to be reconsidered.","technical_approach":"WildVision appears to build an in-the-wild VLM evaluation framework centered on human preference judgments rather than rigid automatic metrics. That design makes sense because open-ended multimodal tasks rarely have a single correct answer, and usefulness depends jointly on perception, factuality, and response quality. The trade-off is higher annotation cost and variance, which makes evaluation protocol design especially important.","experiments":"Given the title, the main experiments likely focus on benchmark construction, annotator agreement, ranking shifts relative to existing VLM benchmarks, and head-to-head preference comparisons among major models. The provided metadata does not include exact sample sizes or model lists. The most valuable finding would be a ranking mismatch: models that do well on standard benchmarks may not be the ones humans prefer in open, real-world scenarios.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","evaluation","human-preference","benchmark"],"keywords":["Vision and Language Models","Evaluation Platform","Benchmark"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的评测协议设计和§5的模型表现排名即可，可用于校准内部VLM预训练的优化目标。","en":"Only read §3 for evaluation protocol design and §5 for model performance ranking, can be used to calibrate internal VLM pretraining optimization objectives."}},{"id":"2410.10912","title":"AlphaPruning: Using Heavy-Tailed Self Regularization Theory for Improved Layer-wise Pruning of Large Language Models","authors":["Haiquan Lu","Yefan Zhou","Shiwei Liu","Zhangyang Wang","Michael W. Mahoney","Yaoqing Yang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$198","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.10912","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LuZLWMY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LuZLWMY24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/10fc83943b4540a9524af6fc67a23fef-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是 LLM pruning 里一个很具体但影响很大的问题：各层可剪枝性差异很大，用统一剪枝率通常会浪费可压缩空间，甚至伤到关键层。现有 layer-wise pruning 多靠启发式，缺少能解释“哪层更成熟、哪层更脆弱”的原则。","importance":"它的重要性在于把压缩从经验调参往可解释信号推进了一步。对 pretrain 研究的启示是，训练后的层并不均质，不同层的谱结构反映了它们被训练得有多充分、冗余有多少；这类分析不仅能指导剪枝，也能反过来帮助理解训练动态、层功能分化和宽深分配。","technical_approach":"AlphaPruning 基于 Heavy-Tailed Self-Regularization 理论，用权重矩阵经验谱密度（ESD）的形状来决定逐层剪枝率。核心判断是：谱尾形状能反映层的训练状态与结构性信息量，训练更充分、谱特征更健康的层与欠训练层在可剪枝性上并不一样。相比统一比例或基于激活/权重幅值的启发式，这种方法直接从层的统计结构出发分配预算，目标是把剪枝更多落在冗余层上，而不是平均伤害所有层。","experiments":"摘要给出的定性结论是：不同层在“训练得多好”以及“可剪多少”上存在显著差异。具体数字被截断，无法确认模型、稀疏率和指标。合理预期是：作者在多个 LLM 上，与 uniform layer-wise pruning 和已有 heuristic layer-adaptive pruning 比较，在相同总体稀疏率下获得更好的 perplexity 或下游精度，并展示基于 HT-SR 的层分配与实际敏感度更一致。若实验扎实，最有价值的是高稀疏率区间的收益，因为那能证明分层预算确实在保护关键层。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical flaw in LLM pruning: layers are not equally prunable, so uniform pruning ratios are often wasteful and can damage critical layers. Existing layer-wise pruning schemes are frequently heuristic and offer little explanation for why one layer should be pruned more than another.","importance":"Its main value is turning pruning from a heuristic exercise into something more structurally informed. For pretraining researchers, the broader lesson is that trained layers are highly non-uniform, and their spectral properties may encode how well-trained or redundant they are. That is useful not only for compression but also for understanding training dynamics and functional specialization across depth.","technical_approach":"AlphaPruning uses Heavy-Tailed Self-Regularization theory, specifically the shape of empirical spectral densities of weight matrices, to assign layer-wise pruning ratios. The idea is that spectral structure reflects training quality and information richness, so layers should not share the same pruning budget. Compared with uniform ratios or magnitude/activation-based heuristics, this method uses layer statistics to place more pruning pressure on redundant layers and less on fragile ones.","experiments":"The abstract states the key qualitative finding: there is substantial variability across layers in how well-trained and therefore how prunable they are. The exact models, sparsity levels, and gains are not visible in the provided text. A plausible evaluation would compare against uniform and heuristic layer-adaptive pruning on several LLMs, showing better perplexity or downstream accuracy at the same overall sparsity, especially in more aggressive pruning regimes.","authors_note":""},"tags":["pruning","llm-compression","layerwise","generalization"],"notable_authors":["Michael W. Mahoney"],"keywords":["Pruning","large language models","heavy tails"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3.2的层谱结构与剪枝率对应规则即可，结论可复用在LLM压缩、训练动态分析工作中。","en":"Only read §3.2 for layer spectrum structure and pruning rate correspondence rules, conclusions can be reused in LLM compression and training dynamic analysis work."}},{"id":"2410.16794","title":"One-Step Diffusion Distillation through Score Implicit Matching","authors":["Weijian Luo","Zemin Huang","Zhengyang Geng","J. Zico Kolter","Guo-Jun Qi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$199","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.16794","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LuoHGKQ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LuoHGKQ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d107ca794d83c8242e357e6a43a068f4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文解决的是 diffusion distillation 的核心难点：怎样把一个多步扩散模型蒸馏成单步生成器，同时尽量不掉画质，而且最好不依赖原始训练数据。现有方法通常仍需要 few-step 采样，或者单步时质量明显劣化，这限制了 diffusion 在低延迟生成中的实用性。","importance":"这是方法级的重要工作。虽然论文面向图像扩散，但对新型语言建模范式尤其是 diffusion LM 也有直接启发：如果 score matching 可以被改写成更适合单步生成器学习的隐式目标，那么很多过去被认为必须靠多步采样维持质量的生成过程，可能都存在更强的 distill 路径。","technical_approach":"作者提出 Score Implicit Matching（SIM），用于把预训练扩散模型蒸馏到 one-step generator。摘要给出的关键点有两个：一是它几乎保留原模型的生成能力；二是 data-free，不需要蒸馏训练样本。方法动机是传统 score-based loss 对单步生成器并不合适，因此他们把目标改写为一种隐式匹配形式，让生成器直接学习与教师扩散过程一致的分布结构，而不是机械拟合中间噪声轨迹。和常见 progressive distillation 不同，它瞄准的是真正单步，并强调无需数据回放。","experiments":"摘要没有给出具体数据集和数字，但结论很明确：SIM 能把预训练 diffusion model 蒸馏成 single-step generator，并保持“almost the same” sample generation ability。若实验完整，通常会在 CIFAR-10、ImageNet 或 latent diffusion 设定下，对比 consistency model、adversarial distillation、progressive distillation 等 baseline，报告 FID、IS 或人评结果。最值得看的不是单一 FID，而是三件事：单步下与教师的差距是否真的很小、是否稳定 data-free、以及不同教师规模下是否同样成立。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a central distillation problem in diffusion models: how to compress a multi-step diffusion sampler into a true one-step generator without major quality loss, and ideally without access to the original training data. Existing methods often still need a few steps or degrade noticeably in the single-step setting.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution with broader implications beyond image diffusion. For alternative language modeling paradigms, especially diffusion-based LMs, the key message is that score-based training objectives may admit stronger single-step distillation routes than commonly assumed. If that holds, the latency disadvantage of diffusion-style generation may be less fundamental than it looks.","technical_approach":"The paper introduces Score Implicit Matching (SIM) for distilling a pretrained diffusion model into a one-step generator. Two claims stand out from the abstract: it is data-free, and it preserves almost the same generation quality as the teacher. The main design choice is to avoid directly using the standard score-based loss, which is mismatched to one-step generators, and instead optimize an implicit matching objective that better aligns the student with the teacher’s distributional behavior.","experiments":"The provided abstract does not list datasets or exact numbers, but it clearly claims near-teacher sample quality in the one-step setting. A full evaluation would likely compare against consistency models, progressive distillation, and other fast-sampling baselines on standard image generation benchmarks, using metrics such as FID and possibly human preference. The most important checks are whether the one-step gap to the teacher is genuinely small, whether the data-free setup remains stable, and whether performance scales across different teacher models.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","distillation","one-step","sampling"],"notable_authors":["J. Zico Kolter"],"keywords":["Diffusion mode","Diffusion Distillation","Text-to-Image Generation","Generative Adversarial Network"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3的Score Implicit Matching目标设计部分即可，思路可迁移到diffusion LM的蒸馏提速工作中。","en":"Only read §3 for Score Implicit Matching objective design, the idea can be migrated to diffusion LM distillation and acceleration work."}},{"id":"2405.15356","title":"Alleviating Hallucinations in Large Vision-Language Models through Hallucination-Induced Optimization","authors":["Xinyu Lyu","Beitao Chen","Lianli Gao","Hengtao Shen","Jingkuan Song"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$19a","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15356","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/LyuCGSS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/LyuCGSS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/dde040998d82553cf7f689e8ae173d5a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LVLM幻觉缓解的对比解码方法依赖全局视觉不确定性，无法精准定位幻觉token，反而可能引入额外幻觉，之前的方法没有解决幻觉诱导的可控性问题。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出的幻觉诱导优化方法可精准定位幻觉token，提升幻觉缓解的效果和稳定性。","technical_approach":"改进的幻觉缓解方法，首先从理论上推导幻觉token的生成机制，设计可控的幻觉诱导模块，仅针对潜在幻觉token放大对比logits差距，避免全局不确定性引入的干扰，无需重新预训练LVLM，仅在解码阶段优化。","experiments":"摘要未披露具体指标提升幅度，仅说明该方法相比现有视觉对比解码方法的幻觉缓解效果更稳定，不会引入额外幻觉。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing contrastive decoding methods for LVLM hallucination mitigation rely on global visual uncertainty, cannot accurately locate hallucination tokens, and may even introduce additional hallucinations. Prior methods do not solve the controllability problem of hallucination induction.","importance":"Method-level contribution. The proposed hallucination-induced optimization method can accurately locate hallucination tokens, improving the effect and stability of hallucination mitigation.","technical_approach":"Improved hallucination mitigation method. It first theoretically derives the generation mechanism of hallucination tokens, designs a controllable hallucination induction module, only amplifies the contrastive logits gap for potential hallucination tokens, avoids interference introduced by global uncertainty, does not require re-pretraining of LVLM, and only optimizes at the decoding stage.","experiments":"No specific metric improvement range is disclosed in the abstract. Only observation is provided: this method has more stable hallucination mitigation effect than existing visual contrastive decoding methods, and will not introduce additional hallucinations.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","hallucination","optimization","alignment"],"keywords":["Hallucination","Contrast Decoding"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LVLM生成的幻觉本质是生成文本与视觉输入的语义不一致","claim_en":"Hallucinations generated by LVLMs are essentially semantic inconsistencies between generated text and visual input","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"全局视觉不确定性会干扰幻觉缓解效果，仅针对潜在幻觉token做对比优化即可实现更好的效果","claim_en":"Global visual uncertainty interferes with hallucination mitigation effect, and only contrastive optimization for potential hallucination tokens can achieve better results","opposes":"Prior assumption of contrastive decoding methods that global visual uncertainty can effectively distinguish hallucination and correct tokens","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"Provides a more accurate optimization direction for LVLM hallucination mitigation, avoiding side effects caused by global modification."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4的幻觉token定位逻辑和解码优化方法即可，无需重新预训练就能快速复用到LVLM部署流程中。","en":"Only read §4 for hallucination token localization logic and decoding optimization method, can be quickly reused in LVLM deployment pipelines without re-pretraining."}},{"id":"MaXZWRYZWS024","title":"Visual Perception by Large Language Model&apos;s Weights","authors":["Feipeng Ma","Hongwei Xue","Yizhou Zhou","Guangting Wang","Fengyun Rao","Shilin Yan","Yueyi Zhang","Siying Wu","Mike Zheng Shou","Xiaoyan Sun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MaXZWRYZWS024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MaXZWRYZWS024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/322e4a595afd9442a89f0bfaa441871e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{},"summary_en":{},"tags":["vlm","visual-perception","weight-space","llm"]},{"id":"MaiC00CPB0S0C24","title":"Fine-Tuning is Fine, if Calibrated","authors":["Zheda Mai","Arpita Chowdhury","Ping Zhang","Cheng-Hao Tu","Hong-You Chen","Vardaan Pahuja","Tanya Y. Berger-Wolf","Song Gao","Charles V. Stewart","Yu Su","Wei-Lun Chao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$19b","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MaiC00CPB0S0C24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MaiC00CPB0S0C24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/f573c36434796efe066d2f4cf3349e7f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"预训练模型微调后会出现预训练知识遗忘的问题，之前的研究默认是模型的预训练特征被破坏导致的，未找到问题的核心原因。","importance":"方法级贡献，修正了对微调知识遗忘的认知，提出的校准方法可在不保留预训练数据的情况下恢复遗忘的知识。","technical_approach":"原创经验发现+方法改进，通过实验验证微调后的模型并没有遗忘预训练知识，只是输出层的分类器分布发生了偏移，仅需要对微调后的模型做校准即可恢复预训练的泛化能力，不需要使用预训练数据做重训或正则化。","experiments":"摘要未披露具体量化指标，仅说明校准后的微调模型在预训练类别的准确率恢复到接近微调前的水平，同时保留下游任务的性能。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Pretrained models suffer from pretrained knowledge forgetting after finetuning. Prior work defaults that this is caused by the destruction of pretrained features of the model, and does not find the core reason for the problem.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It revises the understanding of finetuning knowledge forgetting, and the proposed calibration method can recover forgotten knowledge without retaining pretraining data.","technical_approach":"Original empirical finding + method improvement. It verifies through experiments that the finetuned model does not forget pretrained knowledge, only the classifier distribution of the output layer is shifted. Only calibration of the finetuned model is needed to restore the pretrained generalization ability, no retraining or regularization with pretraining data is required.","experiments":"No specific quantitative metrics are disclosed in the abstract. Only observation is provided: the calibrated finetuned model recovers the accuracy on pretrained classes to a level close to that before finetuning, while retaining the performance on downstream tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["fine-tuning","calibration","llm"],"keywords":["Fine-Tuning","Pre-training","Domain Adaptation"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"预训练模型微调后在非下游类别的性能会出现大幅下降","claim_en":"The performance of pretrained models on non-downstream classes drops significantly after finetuning","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"微调后的模型没有遗忘预训练知识，仅输出层分布偏移导致性能下降","claim_en":"The finetuned model does not forget pretrained knowledge, only the output layer distribution shift causes performance degradation","opposes":"Prior cognition that finetuning will destroy pretrained feature representations","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Analysis","why_contested":"Greatly reduces the cost of knowledge retention after finetuning, no complex regularization or pretraining data replay is required."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3验证实验和§4校准实现即可，颠覆了微调遗忘是预训练特征被破坏的固有认知，可快速复现到内部微调流程。","en":"Only read §3 validation experiments and §4 calibration implementation, it overturns the prior that fine-tuning forgetting comes from pretrained feature corruption, can be quickly reproduced to internal fine-tuning pipelines."}},{"id":"McIlroy-YoungBO24","title":"Order-Independence Without Fine Tuning","authors":["Reid McIlroy-Young","Katrina Brown","Conlan Olson","Linjun Zhang","Cynthia Dwork"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$19c","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/McIlroy-YoungBO24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/McIlroy-YoungBO24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/85529bc995777a74072ef63c05bedd30-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"摘要缺失，无法确认其“无需微调实现 order-independence”具体针对的是生成顺序不敏感（any-order / permutation-invariant）推断，还是对输入 token 顺序扰动的鲁棒性。","importance":"摘要缺失，无法判断其对非 AR 范式（any-order LM / masked LM 推断）或推理时策略的启示强度。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，无法说明其是否通过推断时重排/集成、能量函数重加权、或其他无需训练的解码/评分技巧实现顺序无关。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法给出任务、模型、指标与数值收益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract is provided, so the target notion of “order-independence without fine-tuning” (generation order, input permutation robustness, etc.) cannot be pinned down.","importance":"Without the abstract, the impact on non-AR paradigms (any-order/masked inference) or inference-time strategies cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"No abstract: it is unclear whether order-independence is achieved via inference-time reordering/ensembling, reweighting, or other training-free techniques.","experiments":"No abstract: tasks, models, metrics, and numeric gains are unknown.","authors_note":""},"tags":["order-independence","llm","set-input","inference"],"notable_authors":["Reid McIlroy-Young","Katrina Brown","Conlan Olson","Linjun Zhang","Cynthia Dwork"],"keywords":["LLMs","Multiple Choice Questions","Transformers","Positional Encodings","Modified Attention Mask"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看摘要和方法概述部分即可，信息不足无法判断落地价值，暂时仅作为顺序无关推断方向的弱信号参考。","en":"Only read abstract and method overview, insufficient information to judge production value, serves only as a weak signal for order-invariant inference research for now."}},{"id":"MoallaMPPG24","title":"No Representation, No Trust: Connecting Representation, Collapse, and Trust Issues in PPO","authors":["Skander Moalla","Andrea Miele","Daniil Pyatko","Razvan Pascanu","Caglar Gulcehre"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$19d","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MoallaMPPG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MoallaMPPG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/81166fbd9cc5adf14031cdb69d3fd6a8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"摘要缺失，无法精确说明其在 PPO 中讨论的“representation collapse”是指策略/价值网络表征退化、还是优势估计导致的有效样本多样性坍塌，以及它如何具体引发“trust issues”。","importance":"摘要缺失，无法判断其对 RLHF / post-train 稳定性与 reward hacking 的直接启示强度。","technical_approach":"摘要缺失，无法说明其连接“表征—坍塌—信任”的理论框架或诊断指标，以及是否提出可操作的训练改动。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法给出 PPO 设置、任务、指标与关键数值结论。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract is provided, so the specific notion of “representation collapse” in PPO and how it leads to “trust issues” cannot be described precisely.","importance":"Without the abstract, the implications for RLHF/post-training stability and reward hacking cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"No abstract: the proposed framework/diagnostics and any actionable training modifications are unknown.","experiments":"No abstract: PPO setups, tasks, metrics, and numeric findings are unknown.","authors_note":""},"tags":["ppo","rlhf","representation","training-stability"],"notable_authors":["Skander Moalla","Andrea Miele","Daniil Pyatko","Razvan Pascanu","Caglar Gulcehre"],"keywords":["proximal policy optimization","plasticity loss","trust region","feature rank collapse","regularization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§2问题定义和§3关联分析部分即可，信息有限，可作为RLHF训练稳定性相关研究的补充文献备查。","en":"Only read §2 problem definition and §3 correlation analysis, limited information, can be used as supplementary literature for RLHF training stability research."}},{"id":"MoutakanniOSVB24","title":"You Don&apos;t Need Domain-Specific Data Augmentations When Scaling Self-Supervised Learning","authors":["Théo Moutakanni","Maxime Oquab","Marc Szafraniec","Maria Vakalopoulou","Piotr Bojanowski"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MoutakanniOSVB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MoutakanniOSVB24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d2964af7bd4e891297a39dc9085fa754-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在大规模自监督视觉预训练里，很多“领域特定增强”(domain-specific augmentations)是否真的必要，还是在 scale 上去以后收益会消失。过去工业/医疗等领域常依赖手工增强来弥补数据偏差，但这会引入大量调参成本与不可迁移的经验。","importance":"贡献是给出一个偏“scaling 规律”的结论：当自监督训练足够大时，通用增强可能已经足够，领域特定增强的边际收益变小。对 pretrain 的启示是把资源从“增强技巧”转向“数据规模/覆盖 + 训练配方稳定性”，并提醒小规模实验里看到的增强收益不一定能外推到大规模。","technical_approach":"从标题可推断其方法是系统对照：在不同训练规模下比较通用增强 vs 领域特定增强对自监督表征学习的影响。关键思想是把增强视作一种先验注入：在数据/模型较小、先验不足时它能显著帮助；但当 scale 提供了足够多样性与不变性覆盖时，额外先验可能变成冗余甚至引入偏置。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法给出具体自监督方法（如 DINO/MAE/SimCLR 等）、数据规模、模型规模、下游评测与数值差异，因此只能陈述其主张而不能报告定量结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether domain-specific data augmentations are still necessary in large-scale self-supervised vision pretraining, or whether their gains vanish once you scale data/model/training. In many applied domains, bespoke augmentations are a common but costly crutch.","importance":"Its value is a scaling-oriented claim: at sufficient scale, generic augmentations may be enough and domain-specific ones provide diminishing returns. For pretraining, this shifts effort from augmentation engineering toward data coverage/scale and robust training recipes, and cautions against extrapolating small-scale augmentation wins.","technical_approach":"From the title, the approach is a controlled comparison of generic vs domain-tailored augmentations across training scales in self-supervised learning. The underlying rationale is that augmentations inject invariance priors: helpful when scale is limited, but increasingly redundant (or biasing) when scale already supplies diversity and invariance coverage.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so the specific SSL method, dataset/model scales, downstream evaluations, and numeric deltas cannot be reported.","authors_note":""},"tags":["self-supervised-learning","scaling","data-augmentation","data-quality"],"notable_authors":["Théo Moutakanni","Maxime Oquab","Marc Szafraniec","Maria Vakalopoulou","Piotr Bojanowski"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看Fig5不同规模下的增强收益对比即可，结论可直接指导大规模自监督预训练资源分配，不用再花精力调领域特定增强。","en":"Focus on Fig5 comparing augmentation gains across scales, the conclusion directly guides resource allocation for large-scale self-supervised pretraining, no need to tune domain-specific augmentations anymore."}},{"id":"MukherjeeLKDLMK24","title":"Optimal Design for Human Preference Elicitation","authors":["Subhojyoti Mukherjee","Anusha Lalitha","Kousha Kalantari","Aniket Deshmukh","Ge Liu","Yifei Ma","Branislav Kveton"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Learning of preference models from human feedback has been central to recent advances in artificial intelligence. Motivated by the cost of obtaining high-quality human annotations, we study efficient human preference elicitation for learning preference models. The key idea in our work is to generalize optimal designs, an approach to computing optimal information-gathering policies, to lists of items that represent potential questions with answers. The policy is a distribution over the lists and we elicit preferences from them proportionally to their probabilities. To show the generality of our ideas, we study both absolute and ranking feedback models on items in the list. We design efficient algorithms for both and analyze them. Finally, we demonstrate that our algorithms are practical by evaluating them on existing question-answering problems.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MukherjeeLKDLMK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MukherjeeLKDLMK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a40ff56daab9f4808b1e18350c8a11ce-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在人类偏好学习里，怎样用同样的标注预算收集到信息量更高、对下游模型更有用的偏好数据。现有做法往往默认采用固定的成对比较或简单启发式采样，但偏好标注昂贵且噪声大，不同提问设计带来的统计效率差异一直没有被系统优化。","importance":"这项工作的价值主要在方法与问题设定层面。它不直接提出新的 reward model 或对齐算法，而是把“偏好数据怎么问”本身作为优化对象；这对 RLHF 和 preference modeling 有现实意义，因为很多时候瓶颈不是模型容量，而是高质量偏好信号太贵、太稀缺。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是把人类偏好采集表述为一个最优实验设计或主动查询问题。关键思想不是盲目增加比较样本，而是根据模型当前不确定性和查询信息增益来选择更合适的比较形式或比较对象，从而最大化单位标注成本下的参数识别效率；与常见随机采样相比，这类设计通常更依赖一个显式的偏好噪声模型，并在表达能力与可优化性之间做取舍。","experiments":"从题目看，实验重点大概率是比较不同 preference elicitation 设计在同等标注预算下的估计误差、样本效率和下游偏好预测效果。可预期的关键事实会包括：在固定 annotation budget 下优于随机或启发式查询；并分析噪声水平、候选集规模、偏好模型失配时的鲁棒性。由于给定信息里没有摘要和具体数字，无法可靠写出模型规模、数据量和提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a simple but under-optimized bottleneck: how to elicit human preferences so that each label carries more useful signal for downstream preference learning. In most RLHF-style pipelines, query design is treated as fixed, while the real constraint is often annotation cost and label noise rather than model capacity.","importance":"Its contribution is methodological rather than architectural. The key message for pretraining and post-training practitioners is that preference quality is partly a data collection design problem; better querying can improve reward modeling and alignment without changing the base learner.","technical_approach":"The likely core idea is to cast preference elicitation as optimal experimental design or active querying. Instead of collecting arbitrary pairwise comparisons, the method chooses prompts, candidates, or comparison structures that maximize information gain under a preference-noise model, trading off richer queries against tractable optimization and annotator burden.","experiments":"The main empirical test is likely sample efficiency under a fixed labeling budget. The relevant comparisons would be against random or heuristic query selection, with metrics around preference prediction error, downstream ranking quality, and robustness to noise or model misspecification. The provided metadata contains no abstract or numbers, so model sizes, dataset scales, and exact gains cannot be stated reliably.","authors_note":""},"tags":["preference-learning","human-feedback","reward-model"],"keywords":["optimal design","active learning","preference elicitation","human feedback","learning to rank"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4主动查询策略设计即可，结论可直接复用在内部RLHF偏好数据标注流程里，提升单位标注预算的信息增益。","en":"Only read §4 active query strategy design, the conclusion can be directly reused in internal RLHF preference annotation pipeline, improving information gain per labeling budget."}},{"id":"MurtiB24","title":"DisCEdit: Model Editing by Identifying Discriminative Components","authors":["Chaitanya Murti","Chiranjib Bhattacharyya"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$19e","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MurtiB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MurtiB24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/54801e196796134a2b0ae5e8adef502f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：如何更精确地编辑模型知识或行为，同时尽量不破坏无关能力。现有 model editing 方法经常在“能改掉目标事实”和“副作用小”之间难以兼得，原因是编辑位置选得太粗，或更新作用扩散到不相关参数子空间。","importance":"这项工作属于模型编辑方法。它对 pretrain/post-train 接口有启发，因为编辑其实是在问：预训练知识到底存在哪里、以什么组件组织、能否局部改写；如果能更稳定地定位判别性组件，就有机会把知识更新从暴力微调变成更细粒度的参数干预。","technical_approach":"从标题看，DisCEdit 的核心是先识别对目标知识最具判别性的组件，再进行编辑，而不是对整层或整模块做统一更新。关键设计应是一个组件归因机制，用来找出对目标预测最关键、同时对其他样本较少共享的参数或子结构；与已有 editing 方法相比，这种做法追求的是更高 locality，从而降低 collateral damage。","experiments":"实验应围绕编辑成功率、泛化到释义/上下文变体的效果，以及副作用指标展开。合理的 baseline 会包括常见知识编辑方法和直接微调。若论文完整，通常还会报告多次连续编辑后的退化情况，以及组件选择策略的 ablation。由于给定信息没有摘要和数字，无法可靠给出具体 benchmark、模型规模和提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper focuses on a central model editing challenge: how to change a target behavior or fact while minimizing collateral damage. Existing editing methods often succeed on the edited example but leak changes into unrelated behaviors because the intervention is too coarse.","importance":"This is a model-editing contribution with broader relevance to the pretrain/post-train interface. Better editing methods tell us something concrete about where pretrained knowledge lives and whether it can be updated locally rather than through broad fine-tuning.","technical_approach":"DisCEdit appears to identify discriminative components before applying the edit. The likely idea is to localize the parameters or submodules most responsible for the target prediction and least shared with unrelated examples, then intervene there instead of updating a whole layer or module. The design goal is higher locality and therefore fewer side effects.","experiments":"The main evaluation should cover edit success, generalization to paraphrases or context shifts, and locality metrics measuring unintended changes. Relevant baselines would include standard model editing methods and direct fine-tuning. Without the abstract or results table, the exact benchmarks, model sizes, and numerical gains cannot be stated safely.","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-editing","interpretability","knowledge-editing"],"keywords":["model editing","selective forgetting","structured pruning","total variation distance"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3组件归因机制设计即可，对预训练知识存储定位的相关研究有参考价值，可快速复现做内部消融。","en":"Focus on §3 component attribution mechanism design, valuable for research on pretrained knowledge storage localization, can be quickly reproduced for internal ablation studies."}},{"id":"MyungL0JPABKPAG24","title":"BLEnD: A Benchmark for LLMs on Everyday Knowledge in Diverse Cultures and Languages","authors":["Junho Myung","Nayeon Lee","Yi Zhou","Jiho Jin","Rifki Afina Putri","Dimosthenis Antypas","Hsuvas Borkakoty","Eunsu Kim","Carla Pérez-Almendros","Abinew Ali Ayele","Víctor Gutiérrez-Basulto","Yazmín Ibáñez-García","Hwaran Lee","Shamsuddeen Hassan Muhammad","Ki-Woong Park","Anar Rzayev","Nina White","Seid Muhie Yimam","Mohammad Taher Pilehvar","Nedjma Ousidhoum","José Camacho-Collados","Alice Oh"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$19f","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/MyungL0JPABKPAG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/MyungL0JPABKPAG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/8eb88844dafefa92a26aaec9f3acad93-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：现有 LLM 评测严重偏向英语和少数主流文化，导致模型在“日常常识”上的真实跨文化能力被高估。很多常识其实并不普适，饮食、礼仪、习俗、社会规范都带有地域性；如果基准默认单一文化语境，模型看起来正确，只是因为 benchmark 太窄。","importance":"这项工作的贡献主要是 benchmark 和数据集。对 pretrain 研究很有价值，因为它直接检验多语言、多文化数据混合是否真的形成了更稳健的世界知识表示，而不是只在英语分布上记住了高频模式。","technical_approach":"BLEnD 的核心应是构建覆盖多语言、多文化场景的 everyday knowledge benchmark。关键不是简单翻译英语问题，而是保留文化特异性知识，并区分 genuinely universal knowledge 与 culture-bound knowledge；这类设计比机器翻译扩展 benchmark 更难，但能更真实地暴露训练数据覆盖与表示偏置问题。","experiments":"实验重点应是评测多个主流 LLM 在不同语言、不同文化域上的表现差异，并分析语言能力与文化知识是否同步提升。若论文扎实，通常会展示：英语强模型在非英语文化常识上显著掉分；多语模型不一定自动获得多文化对齐。由于没有摘要和数值，无法可靠写出题量、语言数和具体分数差。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a real evaluation blind spot: current LLM benchmarks over-index on English and a narrow cultural frame, so they overestimate how well models handle everyday knowledge across cultures. Much of what looks like “common sense” is actually culture-specific rather than universal.","importance":"This is mainly a benchmark and dataset contribution, but it matters for pretraining directly. It tests whether multilingual pretraining actually yields broader cultural knowledge, or merely better performance on translated forms of an English-centric distribution.","technical_approach":"BLEnD likely builds a benchmark spanning multiple languages and culturally grounded everyday scenarios. The critical design choice is to avoid simple translation of English questions and instead preserve culture-bound knowledge, separating universal commonsense from local norms, practices, and expectations.","experiments":"The empirical focus should be performance gaps across languages and cultures for major LLMs, along with analysis of whether multilinguality and cultural robustness move together. A likely finding is that strong English models degrade substantially on non-English cultural commonsense, and multilingual models do not automatically solve the problem. No abstract or numeric details are available here, so exact language count, dataset size, and score gaps cannot be given reliably.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","multilingual","evaluation","world-knowledge"],"keywords":["cross-culture","multilingual","benchmark","cultural nlp"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看附录基准构造方法论和主实验跨文化偏差分析即可，可用来评估内部多语言预训练模型的文化表示偏置。","en":"Only read appendix benchmark construction methodology and main experiment cross-cultural bias analysis, can be used to evaluate cultural representation bias of internal multilingual pretrained models."}},{"id":"NguyenWSMOSKK24","title":"Multilingual Diversity Improves Vision-Language Representations","authors":["Thao Nguyen","Matthew Wallingford","Sebastin Santy","Wei-Chiu Ma","Sewoong Oh","Ludwig Schmidt","Pang Wei W. Koh","Ranjay Krishna"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a0","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NguyenWSMOSKK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NguyenWSMOSKK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a6678e2be4ce7aef9d2192e03cd586b7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：视觉-语言预训练里，多语言多样性是否真的能提升表示质量，而不仅仅是让模型支持更多语言接口。很多 VLM 训练仍以英语图文对为主，非英语通常只是翻译扩展；如果语言多样性本身能改善视觉语义空间，那么这会直接影响数据配比与预训练策略。","importance":"这项工作对 VLM 预训练是数据与表示层面的贡献。它的重要性在于把“多语言”从产品覆盖问题提升到表征学习问题：不同语言提供了不同语义切分和描述习惯，可能帮助模型学到更稳健、更少英语偏置的视觉语义对齐。","technical_approach":"从标题看，核心方法不是新架构，而是系统研究并利用 multilingual diversity 来训练 vision-language representations。关键机制可能包括构造多语图文数据、控制语言分布、比较翻译平行数据与原生多语描述，并分析它们如何影响跨模态对齐；与简单加更多 caption 不同，这里强调的是语言视角的互补性，而不是纯数据量扩张。","experiments":"实验应关注检索、分类迁移、零样本识别或跨语言图文匹配，并比较英语单语训练、机器翻译扩展和原生多语训练。若论文扎实，通常会看到：多语言多样性不仅提升非英语任务，也提升整体表示鲁棒性或视觉概念覆盖。由于没有摘要和数值，无法可靠写出数据规模、语言数和具体提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks whether multilingual diversity improves vision-language representations in a substantive way, rather than merely adding more language interfaces to an English-centric model. This matters because most VLM pretraining is still dominated by English captions, with other languages treated as translated add-ons.","importance":"This is a data and representation-learning contribution for VLM pretraining. The key message is that multilinguality may improve the shared visual-semantic space itself, since different languages carve up semantics differently and can reduce the bias of relying on a single descriptive tradition.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is not a new architecture but a careful study of multilingual data diversity in vision-language training. Important design choices would include native multilingual captions versus translated text, language balance, and how multilingual descriptions are paired with the same images to enrich alignment. The point is to leverage complementary semantic views, not just inflate caption count.","experiments":"The evaluation likely covers retrieval, transfer classification, zero-shot recognition, and cross-lingual image-text matching, comparing English-only training, translated multilingual data, and genuinely multilingual setups. A strong result would be that multilingual diversity helps not only non-English performance but also overall representation robustness. No abstract or numbers are available here, so exact dataset size, number of languages, and gains cannot be stated safely.","authors_note":""},"tags":["multilingual","vlm","representation-learning","diversity"],"keywords":["multilingual data","vision-language models","data curation","data filtering","CLIP"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看Fig4不同语言配比下的表征质量对比即可，结论直接指导VLM预训练的多语数据配比调整，不用再把多语只当功能需求。","en":"Focus on Fig4 comparing representation quality under different language ratios, the conclusion directly guides multilingual data ratio adjustment for VLM pretraining, multilingual is no longer just a functional requirement."}},{"id":"NieDWGHXZ24","title":"SlowFocus: Enhancing Fine-grained Temporal Understanding in Video LLM","authors":["Ming Nie","Dan Ding","Chunwei Wang","Yuanfan Guo","Jianhua Han","Hang Xu","Li Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a1","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NieDWGHXZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NieDWGHXZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/94ef721705ea95d6981632be62bb66e2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有Video LLM无法同时保留高分辨率的帧级语义信息和足够多的采样帧覆盖视频全局时序，之前的方法要么降低单帧token数量要么减少采样帧数，牺牲了细粒度理解能力。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出的SlowFocus机制可提升等效采样频率，同时保留帧级和时序信息，无需修改模型主干。","technical_approach":"改进的视频时序采样机制，首先根据用户query定位相关的时序片段，对相关片段做高密度采样保留细粒度信息，对非相关片段做低密度采样减少token占用，不需要修改Video LLM的主干架构，仅优化采样和token聚合策略。","experiments":"摘要未披露具体指标提升幅度，仅说明该机制可在不增加token总量的情况下将等效采样频率提升数倍，细粒度时序理解任务性能明显提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing Video LLMs cannot simultaneously retain high-resolution frame-level semantic information and enough sampled frames to cover the global temporal sequence of the video. Prior methods either reduce the number of tokens per frame or reduce the number of sampled frames, sacrificing fine-grained understanding capabilities.","importance":"Method-level contribution. The proposed SlowFocus mechanism can increase the equivalent sampling frequency while retaining frame-level and temporal information, no need to modify the model backbone.","technical_approach":"Improved video temporal sampling mechanism. It first locates the query-related temporal segment according to the user query, performs high-density sampling on related segments to retain fine-grained information, and performs low-density sampling on non-related segments to reduce token occupation. No modification to the Video LLM backbone architecture is required, only sampling and token aggregation strategies are optimized.","experiments":"No specific metric improvement range is disclosed in the abstract. Only observation is provided: this mechanism can increase the equivalent sampling frequency by several times without increasing the total number of tokens, and the performance on fine-grained temporal understanding tasks is significantly improved.","authors_note":""},"tags":["video-llm","temporal-understanding","fine-grained"],"keywords":["large language model","video understanding"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Video LLM的细粒度时序理解能力受限于可输入的视觉token总量","claim_en":"The fine-grained temporal understanding capability of Video LLMs is limited by the total number of visual tokens that can be input","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"query感知的非均匀采样相比全局均匀采样可在相同token预算下获得更好的细粒度时序理解效果","claim_en":"Query-aware non-uniform sampling achieves better fine-grained temporal understanding performance than global uniform sampling under the same token budget","opposes":"Prior assumption that global uniform sampling is the optimal video sampling strategy","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"Provides a clear direction for token efficiency optimization of long video understanding, no need to increase model capacity to improve performance."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为视频LLM时序采样方向的弱信号备查即可，方法仅优化采样策略无核心预训练相关insight，不需要细读正文。","en":"Serves as a weak signal for video LLM temporal sampling research for reference only, the method only optimizes sampling strategy without core pretraining insight, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"NielsenATN24","title":"Elliptical Attention","authors":["Stefan K. Nielsen","Laziz U. Abdullaev","Rachel S. Y. Teo","Tan Nguyen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a2","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NielsenATN24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NielsenATN24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c63908a3e946af0e7978c23737229137-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有Transformer的点积注意力基于欧氏距离计算权重，容易出现表征坍塌，对污染样本敏感，之前的注意力优化方法没有解决特征空间的各向同性问题。","importance":"架构级贡献，提出的椭圆注意力可提升注意力的鲁棒性，减少表征坍塌，可直接替换原生点积注意力。","technical_approach":"改进的注意力计算方法，用马氏距离替换欧氏距离计算注意力权重，为每个query定义一个高上下文相关性方向的超椭圆邻域，提升该方向内token的注意力权重，不需要修改Transformer的其他组件，可直接替换原生点积注意力。","experiments":"摘要未披露具体指标提升幅度，仅说明椭圆注意力在语言和视觉任务上的鲁棒性优于原生点积注意力，表征坍塌概率降低。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The dot-product self-attention of existing Transformers calculates weights based on Euclidean distance, which is prone to representation collapse and sensitive to contaminated samples. Prior attention optimization methods do not solve the isotropy problem of the feature space.","importance":"Architecture-level contribution. The proposed elliptical attention improves attention robustness, reduces representation collapse, and can directly replace native dot-product attention.","technical_approach":"Improved attention calculation method. It replaces Euclidean distance with Mahalanobis distance to calculate attention weights, defines a hyper-ellipsoidal neighborhood around each query for directions with high contextual relevance, increases the attention weights of tokens in these directions. No modification to other components of Transformer is required, and it can directly replace native dot-product attention.","experiments":"No specific metric improvement range is disclosed in the abstract. Only observation is provided: elliptical attention has better robustness than native dot-product attention on language and vision tasks, and the probability of representation collapse is reduced.","authors_note":""},"tags":["attention","architecture","elliptical"],"keywords":["attention","non-parametric kernel regression","robustness","representation collapse"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"点积注意力的表征坍塌问题会降低Transformer的泛化能力和鲁棒性","claim_en":"The representation collapse problem of dot-product attention reduces the generalization ability and robustness of Transformers","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于马氏距离的椭圆注意力比欧氏距离的点积注意力更适合上下文相关的token权重计算","claim_en":"Mahalanobis distance based elliptical attention is more suitable for context-aware token weight calculation than Euclidean distance based dot-product attention","opposes":"Prior cognition that dot-product attention is the optimal attention calculation method","opposes_cite_hint":"Vaswani 2017 Transformer","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"Provides a new direction for Transformer attention optimization, which can be directly implemented into existing model architectures."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3马氏距离注意力实现和主实验表征坍塌抑制效果对比即可，可直接替换内部预训练的点积注意力做消融。","en":"Focus on §3 Mahalanobis distance attention implementation and representation collapse suppression effect comparison, can directly replace dot-product attention in internal pretraining for ablation."}},{"id":"NikitinKGM24","title":"Kernel Language Entropy: Fine-grained Uncertainty Quantification for LLMs from Semantic Similarities","authors":["Alexander Nikitin","Jannik Kossen","Yarin Gal","Pekka Marttinen"],"institutions":["University of Oxford","Aalto University"],"abstract":"$1a3","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NikitinKGM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NikitinKGM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/10c456d2160517581a234dfde15a7505-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM不确定性量化方法大多基于token级词法/句法概率计算，无法区分不影响答案正确性的表达变体和真实语义级不确定性（与幻觉直接相关），导致幻觉检测误判率高。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了同时适配白盒、黑盒LLM的语义级不确定性量化方案，可直接用于高安全场景下的幻觉检测、预训练后安全校验环节。","technical_approach":"原创方法，设计半正定单位迹核函数编码LLM多轮输出的语义相似度，基于该核计算熵值作为不确定性度量；舍弃了传统依赖模型内部token概率的设计，无需访问logits即可在黑盒场景工作。","experiments":"公开披露的摘要未提及具体测试模型规模、数据集、基线对比及指标提升数值，仅说明方法同时支持白盒与黑盒LLM场景。","authors_note":"团队包含Yarin Gal（牛津大学，贝叶斯深度学习、LLM不确定性领域核心研究者）"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM uncertainty quantification methods mostly calculate entropy based on token-level lexical/syntactic probabilities, which cannot distinguish benign expression variants that do not affect answer correctness from real semantic uncertainty directly related to hallucinations, leading to high false positive rates in hallucination detection.","importance":"Method-level contribution. The proposed semantic-level uncertainty quantification scheme works for both white-box and black-box LLMs, and can be directly used for hallucination detection and post-pretraining safety verification in high-risk scenarios.","technical_approach":"Original method. It designs positive semidefinite unit trace kernels to encode semantic similarities of multiple LLM outputs, and calculates kernel entropy as the uncertainty metric. It abandons the traditional design that relies on internal token probabilities of the model, and works in black-box scenarios without accessing logits.","experiments":"The publicly available abstract does not disclose specific model scales, datasets, baselines or metric improvement values, only states that the method supports both white-box and black-box LLM scenarios.","authors_note":"Team includes Yarin Gal (University of Oxford, core researcher in Bayesian deep learning and LLM uncertainty fields)"},"tags":["uncertainty-quantification","llm","semantic-similarity"],"keywords":["uncertainty quantification","LLMs"],"notable_authors":["Yarin Gal"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM不确定性量化是高安全场景下幻觉检测的核心支撑技术","claim_en":"LLM uncertainty quantification is a core supporting technology for hallucination detection in high-safety scenarios","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于语义相似度的核熵度量对幻觉的识别准确率显著优于传统token级熵度量","claim_en":"Kernel entropy metric based on semantic similarity achieves significantly higher hallucination detection accuracy than traditional token-level entropy metrics","opposes":"Traditional LLM uncertainty quantification methods assume token-level probability-based entropy calculation meets practical requirements","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction","why_contested":"If validated, this conclusion will reshape the technical path of black-box LLM uncertainty evaluation, reducing reliance on model internal access permissions"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4核函数设计和黑盒场景测试结果即可，可直接复用到内部预训练后幻觉检测的安全校验环节，无需访问模型logits。","en":"Only read §4 kernel function design and black-box scenario test results, can be directly reused in post-pretraining hallucination detection pipeline, no need to access model logits."}},{"id":"NingW0Z0CLZ24","title":"FM-Delta: Lossless Compression for Storing Massive Fine-tuned Foundation Models","authors":["Wanyi Ning","Jingyu Wang","Qi Qi","Mengde Zhu","Haifeng Sun","Daixuan Cheng","Jianxin Liao","Ce Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a4","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NingW0Z0CLZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NingW0Z0CLZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/7b75a7339dfb256ee4b4bec028a6890b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"云平台存储海量微调大模型的硬件开销极高，现有通用参数压缩方案未利用微调模型与对应基座模型参数差异小的特性，压缩比偏低。","importance":"系统级工程贡献，专为海量微调模型存储场景设计的无损压缩方案，可直接降低云侧大模型存储成本，对预训练模型分发、微调生态建设有实用价值。","technical_approach":"场景定制的改进型压缩方案，先将微调模型与对应基座模型的参数映射到相同比特位宽的整数，再对两者的参数差做熵编码；舍弃了通用压缩对单模型全局冗余的挖掘逻辑，专门利用微调参数与基座的delta小的先验，实现更高压缩比且完全无损。","experiments":"公开披露的摘要未提及具体压缩比、测试模型规模/数量等数值，仅通过经验与理论分析证明绝大多数云端微调模型与基座的参数差异占比很小。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Cloud platforms face extremely high hardware overhead for storing massive fine-tuned foundation models. Existing general parameter compression schemes do not leverage the characteristic that fine-tuned models have small parameter differences from their corresponding base models, resulting in low compression ratios.","importance":"System-level engineering contribution. This lossless compression scheme is designed specifically for massive fine-tuned model storage scenarios, directly reduces cloud-side LLM storage costs, and has practical value for pre-trained model distribution and fine-tuning ecosystem construction.","technical_approach":"Scenario-customized improved compression scheme. It first maps parameters of fine-tuned models and their corresponding base models to integers with the same bit width, then performs entropy coding on the parameter differences. It abandons the general compression logic of mining global redundancy of a single model, and specifically leverages the prior that the delta between fine-tuned parameters and base parameters is small, achieving higher compression ratio with full losslessness.","experiments":"The publicly available abstract does not disclose specific values such as compression ratio, tested model scale/quantity, only proves through empirical and theoretical analysis that the vast majority of cloud-stored fine-tuned models have very small parameter difference proportions from base models.","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-compression","fine-tuning","storage","delta-compression"],"keywords":["model compression","lossless compression","cloud storage"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"微调大模型与对应预训练基座的参数差异占比极低","claim_en":"Fine-tuned foundation models have very low proportion of parameter differences from their corresponding pre-trained base models","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"针对微调模型与基座的参数delta做熵编码的压缩比显著高于通用无损压缩方案","claim_en":"Entropy coding of parameter deltas between fine-tuned models and base models achieves significantly higher compression ratio than general lossless compression schemes","opposes":"General lossless compression schemes have near-optimal compression efficiency for LLM parameters","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§2 Method","why_contested":"Validates that scenario-specific compression schemes have obvious efficiency advantages over general schemes, providing a new direction for LLM storage optimization"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为微调模型存储工程方案备查即可，属于系统层工程优化，无预训练算法层面的新insight，不需要细读正文。","en":"Serves as an engineering solution for fine-tuned model storage for reference only, it is a system-level optimization without new pretraining algorithm insight, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"NingWL0Y0BDY024","title":"Can LLMs Learn by Teaching for Better Reasoning? A Preliminary Study","authors":["Xuefei Ning","Zifu Wang","Shiyao Li","Zinan Lin","Peiran Yao","Tianyu Fu","Matthew B. Blaschko","Guohao Dai","Huazhong Yang","Yu Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a5","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/NingWL0Y0BDY024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/NingWL0Y0BDY024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/8340b085045cf13f1f0b6c2c4cc0a89c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM能力提升路径高度依赖人类标注数据或更强教师模型的监督，没有无需外部监督的自提升路径；人类可通过教授他人提升自身推理能力，但该机制在LLM上的可行性尚未被验证。","importance":"范式级初步探索，验证了学习-by-教学（LbT）范式可提升LLM推理能力，为无需额外人工数据或更强教师模型的持续预训练/微调提供了新的可能方向。","technical_approach":"原创探索性方案，设计三个层级的LbT机制，分别对应观测学生学习过程、给学生纠错、为学生准备教学材料三个阶段；舍弃了传统知识蒸馏中教师模型固定、仅优化学生的逻辑，反过来让教师模型从教学过程中更新自身参数或prompt。","experiments":"公开披露的摘要未提及具体测试模型规模、推理任务类型及指标提升幅度，仅说明将LbT方法嵌入现有训练/prompt pipeline可获得性能提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM capability improvement paths rely heavily on supervision from human annotated data or stronger teacher models, with no self-improvement path without external supervision. Humans can improve their own reasoning ability by teaching others, but the feasibility of this mechanism in LLMs has not been verified.","importance":"Preliminary paradigm-level exploration. It validates that the learning-by-teaching (LbT) paradigm can improve LLM reasoning ability, providing a new possible direction for continuous pre-training/fine-tuning without additional human data or stronger teacher models.","technical_approach":"Original exploratory scheme. It designs three levels of LbT mechanisms, corresponding to three stages: observing student learning process, correcting student errors, and preparing teaching materials for students. It abandons the traditional knowledge distillation logic where the teacher model is fixed and only the student is optimized, instead letting the teacher model update its own parameters or prompts from the teaching process.","experiments":"The publicly available abstract does not disclose specific tested model scales, reasoning task types or metric improvement magnitudes, only states that integrating LbT methods into existing training/prompt pipelines can achieve performance improvements.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm-reasoning","learning-by-teaching","self-improvement"],"keywords":["LLMs","Learning by Teaching","Reasoning","Mathematical Reasoning","Code Synthesis","Weak-to-Strong Generalization","In-Context Learning","Prompting","Knowledge Distillation","Education-Inspired"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"知识蒸馏中教师模型可向学生模型传递知识以提升学生性能","claim_en":"Teacher models can transfer knowledge to student models to improve student performance in knowledge distillation","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"LLM可通过教授更弱学生模型的过程提升自身推理能力，无需额外人类标注或更强教师模型的监督","claim_en":"LLMs can improve their own reasoning ability through the process of teaching weaker student models, without supervision from additional human annotations or stronger teacher models","opposes":"LLM capability improvement must rely on external supervision signals from human annotations or stronger models","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"If reproducible, this conclusion will completely change the continuous iteration training paradigm of LLMs, reducing reliance on high-quality annotated data"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3三层LbT机制设计和§4推理增益实验即可，可在内部小样本推理微调实验中快速验证可行性。","en":"Only check §3 for the three-tier LbT mechanism and §4 for performance results, you can quickly test its feasibility in internal reasoning fine-tuning ablations."}},{"id":"ParekhKSNC24","title":"A Concept-Based Explainability Framework for Large Multimodal Models","authors":["Jayneel Parekh","Pegah Khayatan","Mustafa Shukor","Alasdair Newson","Matthieu Cord"],"institutions":["Sorbonne University"],"abstract":"$1a6","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ParekhKSNC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ParekhKSNC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/f4fba41b554f9aaa013c4062a1c40518-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大语言多模态模型（LMM）的可解释性方法大多针对单模态模块设计，无法关联视觉和文本的内部表征语义，难以解释LMM跨模态推理的内部逻辑。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出首个针对多模态统一表征的概念可解释框架，对LMM预训练中的跨模态对齐校验、幻觉原因定位有实际参考价值。","technical_approach":"改进型方案，在LMM的token表征层做字典学习，学到的字典元素对应同时具备视觉和文本语义接地的多模态概念；舍弃了传统单模态概念挖掘的思路，直接在跨模态融合后的token空间学习概念，保证语义的跨模态一致性。","experiments":"公开披露的摘要未提及具体测试的LMM类型、指标数值，仅说明定性和定量验证了学到的多模态概念具备语义一致性，可用于解释LMM的推理结果。","authors_note":"团队包含Matthieu Cord（索邦大学，多模态模型、计算机视觉领域核心研究者）"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing interpretability methods for large multimodal models (LMMs) are mostly designed for unimodal modules, cannot correlate internal representation semantics of vision and text, making it difficult to explain the internal logic of LMM cross-modal reasoning.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It proposes the first concept-based interpretability framework for unified multimodal representations, which has practical reference value for cross-modal alignment verification and hallucination cause localization during LMM pre-training.","technical_approach":"Improved scheme. It performs dictionary learning on the token representation layer of LMMs, and the learned dictionary elements correspond to multimodal concepts that are semantically grounded in both vision and text. It abandons the traditional unimodal concept mining idea, and learns concepts directly in the cross-modal fused token space to ensure cross-modal semantic consistency.","experiments":"The publicly available abstract does not disclose specific tested LMM types or metric values, only states that qualitative and quantitative validation confirms the learned multimodal concepts have semantic consistency and can be used to explain LMM inference results.","authors_note":"Team includes Matthieu Cord (Sorbonne University, core researcher in multimodal models and computer vision fields)"},"tags":["multimodal","interpretability","explainability","vlm"],"keywords":["Large multimodal models","interpretability","concept extraction","multimodal concepts","multimodal representations","vision-language models","vision-language interpretations"],"notable_authors":["Matthieu Cord"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"字典学习可用于挖掘神经网络内部表征对应的人类可理解概念","claim_en":"Dictionary learning can be used to mine human-understandable concepts corresponding to internal representations of neural networks","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"在跨模态融合后的token空间学到的多模态概念，比分别在视觉和文本单模态空间学到的概念更适合解释LMM的跨模态推理行为","claim_en":"Multimodal concepts learned in the cross-modal fused token space are more suitable for explaining LMM cross-modal reasoning behavior than concepts learned separately in vision and text unimodal spaces","opposes":"Interpreting internal representations of the LMM's vision encoder and LLM module separately is sufficient for cross-modal reasoning interpretability analysis","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"Points out the path of unified multimodal space analysis for LMM interpretability research, instead of split single-module analysis"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4跨模态概念字典学习方法和Fig5幻觉定位案例即可，可参考用于校验内部LMM预训练的跨模态对齐效果。","en":"Only read §4 for cross-modal concept dictionary learning method and Fig.5 for hallucination localization cases, it helps verify cross-modal alignment of internal pre-trained LMMs."}},{"id":"ParkK024","title":"Discrete Dictionary-based Decomposition Layer for Structured Representation Learning","authors":["Taewon Park","Hyun-Chul Kim","Minho Lee"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a7","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ParkK024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ParkK024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/259762417183b58aa5bb842c1e502076-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"基于张量积表示（TPR）的神经符号网络在处理分布外输入时，无法有效将其分解为结构化的TPR表征，导致符号操作准确率大幅下降，系统泛化能力差。","importance":"架构级贡献，提出的D3层可直接嵌入现有TPR-based神经符号网络，提升其系统泛化能力，对需要结构化推理的预训练模型架构设计有参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创架构组件，采用离散可学习的键值字典捕捉分解所需的核心符号特征，支撑输入到TPR表征的准确分解；舍弃了TPR原有的连续空间分解思路，引入离散字典的强先验约束分解过程的结构合规性。","experiments":"公开披露的摘要未提及具体测试任务、基线模型及指标提升数值，仅说明D3层可提升TPR-based模型的分解能力。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Tensor Product Representation (TPR) based neuro-symbolic networks cannot effectively decompose out-of-distribution inputs into structured TPR representations, leading to significant drop in symbolic operation accuracy and poor systematic generalization.","importance":"Architecture-level contribution. The proposed D3 layer can be directly embedded into existing TPR-based neuro-symbolic networks to improve their systematic generalization, and has reference value for pre-trained model architecture design that requires structured reasoning.","technical_approach":"Original architecture component. It uses discrete learnable key-value dictionaries to capture core symbolic features required for decomposition, supporting accurate decomposition of inputs into TPR representations. It abandons TPR's original continuous space decomposition idea, and introduces strong prior from discrete dictionaries to constrain the structural compliance of the decomposition process.","experiments":"The publicly available abstract does not disclose specific test tasks, baseline models or metric improvement values, only states that the D3 layer can improve the decomposition capability of TPR-based models.","authors_note":""},"tags":["discrete-representation","dictionary-learning","tokenizer","representation-learning"],"keywords":["tensor product representation","neuro-symbolic neural network","systematic generalization","compositional generalization","decomposition problem","structured representation learning","discrete representation learning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"张量积表示（TPR）可让神经网络实现可微的符号操作，提升系统泛化能力","claim_en":"Tensor Product Representation (TPR) enables differentiable symbolic operations for neural networks and improves systematic generalization","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"引入离散键值字典约束的分解层，可显著提升TPR-based模型对分布外输入的分解准确率","claim_en":"Decomposition layer constrained by discrete key-value dictionaries significantly improves the decomposition accuracy of TPR-based models for out-of-distribution inputs","opposes":"Continuous space matching based TPR decomposition schemes are sufficient to cover out-of-distribution input processing requirements","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Method","why_contested":"Validates the improvement effect of discrete priors on the generalization ability of neuro-symbolic models, providing a new idea for related architecture design"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作为神经符号结构化表征相关文献备查，不用读正文，对通用预训练架构设计参考价值极低。","en":"Only for literature reference for neuro-symbolic structured representation research, no need to read full text, negligible value for general pre-training architecture design."}},{"id":"PatelSWPKK24","title":"DART-Eval: A Comprehensive DNA Language Model Evaluation Benchmark on Regulatory DNA","authors":["Aman Patel","Arpita Singhal","Austin Wang","Anusri Pampari","Maya Kasowski","Anshul Kundaje"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a8","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PatelSWPKK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PatelSWPKK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/71998bfc3217ffe1cca1ee084dfadadd-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：DNA 语言模型（尤其是调控序列建模）缺少统一、可复现、覆盖关键生物学任务的评测体系，导致“更大模型/更好 tokenizer/更好目标函数”到底带来什么收益很难对齐比较。","importance":"贡献是基准/评测级：DART-Eval 试图把 regulatory DNA 的核心任务系统化，给 DNA LM 的预训练研究提供类似 NLP/VLM benchmark 的共同坐标系，价值在于减少“各测各的”带来的结论不可比。","technical_approach":"方法上是构建综合评测套件：围绕调控 DNA 的典型预测与理解任务组织数据、划分与指标，并强调对 DNA LM 关键能力（如 motif/调控元件、长程依赖、细胞类型特异性等）的覆盖。其设计取舍通常在：任务覆盖面 vs. 标注质量/成本；跨数据集一致性 vs. 领域特定设置；以及避免信息泄漏（同源序列/近重复）以保证评测有效性。","experiments":"题目与摘要未提供基准包含的任务数、数据规模、参与对比的模型家族与具体分数，因此无法总结哪些预训练选择（上下文长度、masking 策略、tokenization 粒度等）在该基准上最敏感。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles an evaluation gap: regulatory DNA language models lack a unified, reproducible benchmark, making it hard to compare pretraining choices (scale, tokenization, objectives) in a meaningful way.","importance":"This is a benchmark-level contribution: DART-Eval aims to standardize evaluation for regulatory DNA, providing a shared reference point analogous to NLP/VLM benchmarks and reducing non-comparable, dataset-specific claims.","technical_approach":"The work centers on assembling a comprehensive suite of tasks, datasets, splits, and metrics that reflect key capabilities for regulatory sequence modeling (motifs/regulatory elements, long-range dependencies, cell-type specificity, etc.). The core trade-offs are breadth vs. label quality/cost, cross-dataset consistency vs. domain-specific realism, and leakage control (homology/near-duplicates) to keep evaluation honest.","experiments":"No details are provided on task count, dataset sizes, model baselines, or scores, so sensitivity to specific pretraining design choices cannot be summarized from the given metadata.","authors_note":""},"tags":["dna-lm","benchmark","evaluation","language-modeling"],"notable_authors":["Aman Patel","Arpita Singhal","Austin Wang","Anusri Pampari","Maya Kasowski"],"keywords":["DNA","Language Models","LLMs","Biology","Foundation Models","Benchmarks","Gene Regulation","Healthcare"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§2评测任务设计和附录信息泄漏规避方案即可，做DNA预训练时可直接复用该基准的能力评测逻辑。","en":"Only check §2 for evaluation task design and appendix for info leakage avoidance schemes, you can reuse its benchmark logic for DNA LM pre-training capability evaluation."}},{"id":"Peng0LLZ24","title":"Pseudo-Private Data Guided Model Inversion Attacks","authors":["Xiong Peng","Bo Han","Feng Liu","Tongliang Liu","Mingyuan Zhou"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1a9","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Peng0LLZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Peng0LLZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3a797b10ff20562b1ecee0d4e914c1c7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：模型反演攻击（从模型中恢复训练数据）在现实里往往缺少足够强的先验，导致恢复质量不稳定，而防御方也难以评估“在什么先验下会被攻破”。","importance":"贡献偏安全方法级：提出用“伪私有数据”（pseudo-private data）来引导反演，使攻击更可控、更强，从而把隐私风险评估从“偶发成功”推进到“可系统复现的压力测试”。","technical_approach":"核心思路是构造一批与真实私有数据分布相近但不等同的引导样本，把它们作为先验/初始化/约束信号嵌入反演优化过程，从而缩小搜索空间并提高恢复的语义一致性。这样设计的原因是：纯从参数或输出分布反推训练样本是高度欠定问题，引入分布级先验能显著改善可识别性。边界在于伪私有数据的获取假设：如果攻击者拿不到足够接近的分布，增益会下降；同时该方法也可能高估某些场景的实际攻击能力。","experiments":"题目与摘要未提供攻击设置（白盒/黑盒）、目标模型类型、数据集、成功率指标与提升幅度，因此无法判断其对不同防御（DP-SGD、去重、输出过滤等）的穿透力。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical limitation of model inversion: without strong priors, reconstructing training data from a model is ill-posed and results are unstable, making privacy risk hard to assess systematically.","importance":"This is a security-method contribution: it strengthens inversion by using “pseudo-private” data as guidance, turning privacy evaluation into a more reproducible stress test rather than sporadic successes.","technical_approach":"The approach builds a set of proxy samples that are distributionally close to the private data and injects them as priors/initialization/constraints in the inversion optimization, reducing the search space and improving semantic fidelity. The rationale is that inversion from parameters/outputs alone is underdetermined; distribution-level priors improve identifiability. The main limitation is the assumption about access to a close proxy distribution—if that proxy is weak, gains diminish, and the method may overestimate real-world attacker capability in some settings.","experiments":"No details are provided on threat model (white-/black-box), target architectures, datasets, metrics, or deltas, so robustness against common defenses (DP-SGD, dedup, output filtering) cannot be assessed from the given metadata.","authors_note":""},"tags":["privacy","model-inversion","data-leakage","security"],"notable_authors":["Xiong Peng","Bo Han","Feng Liu","Tongliang Liu","Mingyuan Zhou"],"keywords":["Model Inversion Attacks"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3伪私有数据构造方法和§5攻击效果对比实验即可，可参考用于内部预训练模型的隐私风险压力测试。","en":"Only read §3 for pseudo-private data construction method and §5 for attack effect comparison experiments, it can be used for privacy risk stress testing of internal pre-trained models."}},{"id":"PengS24","title":"Quantifying and Optimizing Global Faithfulness in Persona-driven Role-playing","authors":["Letian Peng","Jingbo Shang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1aa","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PengS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PengS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/309cadc33589efca4018a490c07db263-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：persona/角色扮演对话里，模型常出现“局部像、全局不像”的不一致（前几轮符合人设，后面漂移），但现有评测多停留在逐轮打分，缺少对全局一致性的量化与优化目标。","importance":"贡献偏指标+优化目标：提出可度量的 global faithfulness，并尝试把它变成可优化信号，对对话式 post-train（SFT/RL）如何定义奖励与避免 reward hacking 有直接启示。","technical_approach":"核心思路是把 persona 约束从局部属性匹配提升到跨轮次的全局一致性度量，并据此做训练或解码层面的优化。这样做有效的原因是：角色一致性是跨时间的约束，逐轮指标会鼓励“当下迎合”而不惩罚后续漂移。边界在于：persona 本身可能含糊或自相矛盾，全局指标需要处理多目标冲突（既要遵守人设又要完成任务），否则会把合理的策略变化误判为不忠实。","experiments":"题目与摘要未提供数据集、评测协议、指标定义细节与提升幅度，因此无法判断该 global faithfulness 与人类偏好的一致程度，以及在不同对话长度下的稳定性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a common failure in persona role-play: models can be locally consistent but drift globally over a conversation, while most evaluations score turn-by-turn and miss long-horizon inconsistency.","importance":"This is mainly a metric/objective contribution: it formalizes and optimizes “global faithfulness,” which is directly relevant to how we design rewards for dialogue post-training and how to avoid reward hacking from myopic metrics.","technical_approach":"The approach elevates persona constraints from local attribute matching to a cross-turn global consistency measure, and then uses it as an optimization signal (training and/or decoding). The motivation is that persona adherence is inherently temporal; per-turn metrics encourage short-term compliance without penalizing later drift. Limitations include ambiguous or internally conflicting personas and multi-objective tension (persona vs task success), where a naive global metric can misclassify reasonable strategy shifts as unfaithful.","experiments":"No details are provided on datasets, protocols, metric definitions, or deltas, so alignment with human judgments and stability across conversation lengths cannot be assessed from the given metadata.","authors_note":""},"tags":["persona","faithfulness","role-playing","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Letian Peng","Jingbo Shang"],"keywords":["Persona-driven Role-playing","Global Faithfulness Control","Evaluation Metric","Direct Preference Optimization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3全局忠实度量化指标和§4.2优化目标设计即可，可直接参考调整对话SFT的奖励函数设计。","en":"Only check §3 for global faithfulness quantification metrics and §4.2 for optimization objective design, it can be referenced to adjust reward function design for conversational SFT."}},{"id":"PetersenBE24","title":"TrAct: Making First-layer Pre-Activations Trainable","authors":["Felix Petersen","Christian Borgelt","Stefano Ermon"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1ab","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PetersenBE24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PetersenBE24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/bc52716d13d2d72ea0f335667d86c0f8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：Transformer 的第一层通常把输入 embedding 直接送入固定的线性层/归一化，导致“输入表征如何被第一层激活空间接收”几乎不可控，可能限制优化与特征对齐。","importance":"贡献偏架构/优化小改动：让第一层 pre-activation（进入非线性/注意力前的激活）可训练，属于低侵入的参数化增强，潜在价值在于改善训练动态或提升小模型/小数据下的可塑性。","technical_approach":"TrAct 的核心是把第一层的 pre-activations 从纯函数变成带可学习自由度的对象（例如引入可训练偏移/缩放/基向量或可学习的激活“起点”），从而让模型在训练早期更容易把输入投影到有利的激活区域。这样做的直觉是：第一层决定了后续层看到的信号分布，若其分布不合适会导致梯度利用率低或特征被压扁。代价与边界在于：额外自由度可能带来过拟合或破坏尺度稳定性，需要与归一化/初始化配套，否则可能引入训练不稳定。","experiments":"题目与摘要未提供具体模型、任务、训练设置与提升数字，因此无法判断它更像“普适小增益”还是只在特定初始化/数据 regime 下有效。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a controllability/optimization issue: the first layer largely determines how input embeddings enter the model’s activation space, yet that interface is typically rigid and may limit trainability or feature alignment.","importance":"This is a small but potentially useful architecture/optimization tweak: making first-layer pre-activations trainable is low-intrusion and could improve training dynamics or adaptability, especially in small-model or low-data regimes.","technical_approach":"TrAct turns the first-layer pre-activations from a fixed function into a learnable object (e.g., via trainable offsets/scales/bases), allowing the model to shape early activation distributions into a more favorable region for downstream layers. The motivation is that a poor first-layer activation distribution can waste gradient signal or collapse features. The trade-offs are extra degrees of freedom that may overfit or destabilize scale unless paired with appropriate normalization/initialization.","experiments":"No experimental specifics are provided (models, tasks, settings, deltas), so it is unclear whether gains are broadly consistent or regime-dependent.","authors_note":""},"tags":["architecture","optimization","training-stability"],"notable_authors":["Felix Petersen","Christian Borgelt","Stefano Ermon"],"keywords":["computer vision","convolution","second-order","optimization"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3 TrAct层参数化方案和§4小模型训练动态对比实验即可，可在小参数量级的预训练实验中快速验证增益。","en":"Only read §3 for TrAct layer parameterization scheme and §4 for small model training dynamic comparison experiments, you can quickly verify gains in small parameter pre-training experiments."}},{"id":"PiZZPC024","title":"Image Textualization: An Automatic Framework for Generating Rich and Detailed Image Descriptions","authors":["Renjie Pi","Jianshu Zhang","Jipeng Zhang","Rui Pan","Zhekai Chen","Tong Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1ac","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PiZZPC024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PiZZPC024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/c37d94c04effc86d72ab2258ba9b76c7-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：现有图像描述数据往往偏短、偏模板化，限制了 VLM 在细粒度感知与长文本生成上的训练信号，而人工标注高密度描述成本过高。","importance":"贡献偏数据生成框架：提出自动化“Image Textualization”流程来生成更丰富细节的图像描述，可作为 VLM 预训练/中训练的数据扩增手段，影响的是对齐质量与长描述能力而非单一模型结构。","technical_approach":"核心是一个自动生成管线：把图像转成结构化的中间表示（例如对象、属性、关系、区域细节）再组织成更长、更信息密度的文本描述，并通过一致性检查或多模型互审降低幻觉。这样做的原因是：直接让 captioner 生成长文本容易跑偏，而先结构化再叙述能把生成约束在可验证的视觉证据上。边界在于：上游视觉解析错误会被“写进”长描述并放大；同时过度追求细节可能牺牲自然性与多样表达，导致训练分布偏离真实用户描述。","experiments":"题目与摘要未提供生成数据规模、与人工标注/现有 caption 数据的质量对比指标（如人评、覆盖率、幻觉率）以及对下游 VLM 的提升幅度，因此无法判断其性价比与可迁移性。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a data bottleneck: many caption datasets are short and templated, limiting training signals for fine-grained perception and long-form generation, while dense human annotations are expensive.","importance":"This is primarily a data-generation framework contribution: it proposes an automatic “image textualization” pipeline to produce richer, more detailed descriptions, useful for VLM pretraining/mid-training as a scalable augmentation lever.","technical_approach":"The framework likely converts images into structured intermediate representations (objects, attributes, relations, region-level details) and then verbalizes them into longer, information-dense descriptions, with consistency checks or multi-model verification to reduce hallucinations. The motivation is that direct long captioning drifts easily; structuring first anchors generation to verifiable visual evidence. Limitations include error amplification from upstream visual parsing and the risk that overly detailed synthetic text becomes unnatural or distribution-shifting relative to real user descriptions.","experiments":"No details are provided on generated data scale, quality metrics (human eval, coverage, hallucination rate), or downstream VLM gains, so cost-effectiveness and transferability cannot be assessed from the given metadata.","authors_note":""},"tags":["image-captioning","data-synthesis","vlm"],"notable_authors":["Renjie Pi","Jianshu Zhang","Jipeng Zhang","Rui Pan","Zhekai Chen"],"keywords":["Multimodal large language model","image captioning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3图像结构化解析转文本的管线设计即可，可参考用于VLM预训练的细粒度图文对齐数据扩增。","en":"Only check §3 for the pipeline design of converting structured image parsing to text, it can be referenced for fine-grained image-text alignment data augmentation for VLM pre-training."}},{"id":"PoesiaBHG24","title":"Learning Formal Mathematics From Intrinsic Motivation","authors":["Gabriel Poesia","David Broman","Nick Haber","Noah D. Goodman"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1ad","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PoesiaBHG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PoesiaBHG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/4b8001fc75f0532827472ea5a16af9ca-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：形式化数学学习长期受限于外部监督稀缺，尤其是 theorem proving 往往依赖人工证明轨迹或验证器驱动的窄奖励，导致学习信号又贵又脆弱。作者想证明，模型能否像在开放环境探索那样，依靠内在动机主动发现有价值的数学结构，而不是只在给定题库上被动拟合。","importance":"这篇工作的意义超过一个窄任务技巧，属于训练信号设计层面的探索。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：在高验证成本、强组合结构、外部标签少的领域，内在动机可能是把“生成式预训练”推进到“自发现可学习子目标”的桥梁；这和 latent reasoning、self-improvement、proof/data synthesis 有明显关联。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是把 formal math 学习组织成一个由内在奖励驱动的探索过程，而不是纯监督 imitation。关键设计通常包括：定义什么样的状态或证明片段值得探索，怎样避免模型反复收集无意义但容易得到的 novelty，怎样让内在奖励和形式验证器结合以保证可检验性；与只用 theorem prover 成败作为稀疏奖励相比，这种方法更可能提供密集学习信号，但也更依赖奖励设计是否真的对应长期证明能力。","experiments":"题目显示实验重点大概率是 formal mathematics 或 theorem proving 环境中的学习效率和泛化，而不是标准自然语言 benchmark。重要结果通常会比较：仅监督学习、仅外部验证奖励、以及加入 intrinsic motivation 的方法在已知题目成功率、探索到的新定理/中间引理数量、以及跨分布泛化上的差异；若论文做得扎实，还会分析不同内在奖励定义对探索质量的影响。具体使用 Lean、Isabelle 还是其他形式系统，模型规模、题目数量和数值提升，目前无法从给定信息确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a hard bottleneck in formal mathematics: useful supervision is scarce, and theorem proving systems often rely on expensive proof traces or very sparse verifier-based rewards. The question is whether a model can learn mathematics through intrinsic motivation—by discovering useful structure to explore—rather than only fitting externally supplied demonstrations.","importance":"This matters beyond formal math as a training-signal paper. For pretraining researchers, the broader lesson is that in domains with strong compositional structure and limited labels, intrinsic objectives may help bridge plain generative pretraining and self-directed acquisition of reasoning skills, which connects directly to self-improvement, synthetic data generation, and latent reasoning.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to frame formal-math learning as exploration guided by intrinsic rewards instead of pure supervised imitation. The crucial design choice is how to define 'interesting' proof states or derivations so that the agent does not exploit novelty for its own sake; pairing intrinsic rewards with formal verification is the natural way to keep the signal grounded. Compared with sparse success/failure rewards from a prover alone, this can provide denser learning signals, but it also raises the usual reward-design risk.","experiments":"The experiments are likely centered on theorem proving or formal mathematics benchmarks, measuring learning efficiency and generalization rather than broad NLP performance. The key comparisons should be against supervised baselines and verifier-only reward setups, with gains in solved problems, discovery of useful intermediate lemmas, or out-of-distribution transfer. The abstract is missing, so the formal system used, model size, dataset scale, and exact numerical improvements cannot be verified.","authors_note":""},"tags":["math-reasoning","intrinsic-motivation","formal-math","llm"],"keywords":["reasoning","reinforcement learning","formal mathematics","logic"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3内在奖励定义和§4自发现数学结构的实验结果即可，可参考为逻辑推理预训练的自监督信号设计。","en":"Only read §3 for intrinsic reward definition and §4 for self-discovered mathematical structure results, it can be referenced for self-supervised signal design for logical reasoning pre-training."}},{"id":"PoloXWSBCOSY24","title":"Efficient multi-prompt evaluation of LLMs","authors":["Felipe Maia Polo","Ronald Xu","Lucas Weber","Mírian Silva","Onkar Bhardwaj","Leshem Choshen","Allysson Flavio Melo de Oliveira","Yuekai Sun","Mikhail Yurochkin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1ae","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/PoloXWSBCOSY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/PoloXWSBCOSY24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/28236482f64a72eec43706b6f3a6c511-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：LLM 评测里常常需要对同一个样本配多种 prompt 反复跑推理，但现有做法基本把每个 prompt 当成独立请求处理，重复计算非常严重。这个问题过去还能靠离线评测慢慢跑，但随着 prompt 集合更大、模型更贵、多模板评测更常见，评测成本本身已经影响实验迭代速度。","importance":"它属于系统与评测方法交叉的工作。对 pretrain 研究的意义不在于直接提升模型能力，而在于显著降低 prompt sweep、template robustness 和 benchmark 重复测量的算力门槛；这会改变很多训练研究的实验设计，因为以前不愿做的大规模多 prompt 分析，现在可能变得可行。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是 multi-prompt evaluation 的共享计算：把多个 prompt 之间可复用的前缀、注意力状态或中间表示合并处理，减少重复的 prefill 或 token-level 计算。设计上的关键在于两件事：一是如何识别不同 prompt 间真正可共享的部分，二是如何在共享后仍保持与逐条独立评测一致的输出；如果做不到精确等价，就必须明确近似带来的偏差边界。","experiments":"实验最关键的事实通常不是任务精度，而是吞吐、延迟和显存。合理的结果形式是：在多个常见 benchmark 或 prompt ensemble 设置下，相比逐 prompt 独立评测，方法在 wall-clock 时间、GPU-hours 或 tokens/s 上实现明显加速，同时保持相同或近似相同的评测分数；进一步的 ablation 可能会分析 prompt 数量越多、共享前缀越长时收益越大。由于没有摘要，无法确认其是否依赖特定模型架构、是否改动 KV cache，以及具体 speedup 数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical but increasingly important inefficiency: LLM evaluation often runs many prompts over the same underlying example, yet standard pipelines treat them as independent requests and redo most of the computation. That was tolerable when evaluation was small and infrequent, but it has become a serious bottleneck for prompt sweeps, robustness checks, and ensemble-style benchmarking.","importance":"This is primarily a systems-for-research contribution. It does not change model capability directly, but it can materially lower the cost of prompt-sensitive evaluation, which in turn affects how pretraining and post-training studies are run: more templates, better variance estimates, and broader ablations become affordable.","technical_approach":"The core idea is likely shared computation across prompts, reusing common prefixes, attention states, or intermediate activations so that multiple prompt variants can be evaluated together. The design challenge is to maximize reuse without breaking exact equivalence to independent runs; if the method uses approximation, then the error introduced into evaluation must be characterized rather than assumed negligible.","experiments":"The most important results should be efficiency numbers rather than task scores: throughput, latency, memory footprint, and total evaluation cost. A strong paper here would show substantial speedups over independent prompt evaluation across standard benchmarks or prompt ensembles while preserving identical or near-identical scores, plus scaling trends showing larger gains as the number of prompts or shared prefix length increases. The provided information does not include exact speedup values or implementation details.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm-evaluation","multi-prompt","efficiency"],"keywords":["llm","multi-prompt evaluation","efficient evaluation","evaluation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3共享计算优化方案即可，可直接复用降低内部预训练模型多prompt评测的算力成本。","en":"Only check §3 for shared computing optimization scheme, you can directly reuse it to cut computing cost of multi-prompt evaluation for internal pre-trained models."}},{"id":"QianDZZDLW24","title":"Streaming Long Video Understanding with Large Language Models","authors":["Rui Qian","Xiaoyi Dong","Pan Zhang","Yuhang Zang","Shuangrui Ding","Dahua Lin","Jiaqi Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1af","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/QianDZZDLW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/QianDZZDLW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d7ce06e9293c3d8e6cb3f80b4157f875-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：长视频理解对 LLM/VLM 来说最大的瓶颈不是单帧编码，而是视频流长度远超上下文窗口，导致信息必须边看边压缩，否则既放不下也算不起。过去很多方法通过离线抽帧或先做全视频摘要来回避，但这会丢掉时序细节，也不适合真正的 streaming 场景。","importance":"它的重要性偏多模态系统方法，但和 native multimodal pretraining 也有关。对 pretrain 研究的启示是：当视频被当作连续 token 流处理时，模型需要在表示层就支持在线压缩、记忆更新和事件保留，这和长文本训练里的 memory management 很像，只是视觉信息更稠密、更冗余。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是为 LLM 构建 streaming long video understanding 框架，让模型在接收视频流时逐步更新状态，而不是等全部视频编码完再统一推理。设计上的关键是如何做信息筛选：保留哪些帧、压缩成什么记忆单元、何时刷新历史、以及怎样避免后来的内容覆盖早期关键事件；相比简单均匀采样或固定窗口滑动，这种方法如果有效，应该是在‘压缩什么’上更有任务感知性。","experiments":"实验重点应是长视频 benchmark 上的准确率与效率共同评估。关键结果一般包括：相比全量离线处理、均匀采样、关键帧选择或 sliding-window baseline，在更低内存和更短推理时间下保持更高问答/检索/事件理解性能；有价值的 ablation 会分析不同 memory budget、流式步长和压缩策略对结果的影响。由于没有摘要，无法确认其是否训练了原生视频-语言模型，还是在现有 LLM 上加 streaming adapter，也无法给出 benchmark 名称和具体数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets the core bottleneck in long-video understanding with LLMs: the issue is not just visual encoding, but that video streams are far longer than the model context, so information must be compressed online or the system becomes both intractable and forgetful. Prior work often sidestepped this with offline frame subsampling or whole-video summaries, but those lose temporal detail and do not fit true streaming use cases.","importance":"This is mainly a multimodal systems paper, but it also matters for native multimodal pretraining. The broader lesson is that once video is treated as a token stream, the model needs mechanisms for online compression, memory updates, and event retention—very similar to long-context language modeling, except the redundancy pattern is much higher.","technical_approach":"The method likely builds a streaming framework in which the model updates an internal memory while processing the video incrementally, rather than encoding the entire sequence first. The hard part is selective retention: which frames or segments should be preserved, how should they be summarized, when should memory be refreshed, and how do we prevent later content from overwriting earlier but still relevant events. That is the meaningful difference from uniform sampling or fixed sliding windows.","experiments":"The key experiments should jointly evaluate accuracy and efficiency on long-video benchmarks. A strong paper would show better QA, retrieval, or event-understanding performance than offline processing, uniform sampling, keyframe selection, or sliding-window baselines under lower memory and runtime budgets, with ablations over memory size and streaming granularity. The abstract is missing, so the exact model setup, benchmarks, and numerical gains cannot be verified.","authors_note":""},"tags":["long-video","streaming","vlm","llm"],"keywords":["LLM","Long Video Understanding","Memory-Propagated Streaming Encoding","Adaptive Memory Selection"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3流式状态更新机制和§4长视频理解效果对比即可，可参考设计原生多模态预训练的长时序记忆模块。","en":"Only read §3 for streaming state update mechanism and §4 for long video understanding comparison results, it can be referenced to design long-sequence memory modules for native multimodal pre-training."}},{"id":"QiaoDFYCZWLC24","title":"Prism: A Framework for Decoupling and Assessing the Capabilities of VLMs","authors":["Yuxuan Qiao","Haodong Duan","Xinyu Fang","Junming Yang","Lin Chen","Songyang Zhang","Jiaqi Wang","Dahua Lin","Kai Chen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1b0","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/QiaoDFYCZWLC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/QiaoDFYCZWLC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/cac9e747a1d480c78312226959566cef-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：当前 VLM 的能力评估经常把感知、对齐、知识和推理揉在一个总分里，导致你知道模型好不好，却不知道问题出在哪一层。过去大家默认 benchmark 越大越全面，但对模型设计者来说，不能把能力拆开就很难判断该补视觉编码、图文对齐，还是语言推理。","importance":"它属于评测框架工作，但对 VLM 预训练非常有价值。原因是：如果评估不能解耦能力来源，训练改动的因果归因就会很差，尤其在 native multimodal 预训练里，视觉 tokenizer、跨模态对齐 loss 和语言 backbone 之间的贡献很容易被混淆；Prism 这类框架的意义在于把错误定位变得更可操作。","technical_approach":"核心方法是一个 decoupling and assessing framework，用系统化任务设计或诊断维度把 VLM 能力拆成相对独立的部分。关键不在于再收集一堆题，而在于控制变量：例如尽量让某些任务只测视觉感知、不让语言先验代答；另一些任务专门测跨模态绑定或组合推理。与传统综合 benchmark 相比，这种框架如果设计得好，能把‘模型分数低’转成‘模型在哪个模块失分’。","experiments":"实验重点应是证明这个框架确实能区分不同 VLM 的能力画像，而不只是重复现有排行榜。关键结果通常包括：若干主流闭源/开源 VLM 在 Prism 各维度上呈现明显不同短板；某些模型总分接近，但一个输在视觉细节感知，另一个输在图文关联或多步推理；进一步的 case study 可能把模型架构或训练配方差异和特定能力缺陷对应起来。因为没有摘要，无法确认具体维度设计、覆盖模型数量和统计显著性结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a common weakness in VLM evaluation: most benchmarks collapse perception, alignment, world knowledge, and reasoning into a single score, so we learn that a model is good or bad without learning why. Large aggregate benchmarks are useful for ranking, but they are poor diagnostic tools for model builders.","importance":"This is an evaluation-framework paper with clear value for VLM pretraining. If capability sources are not disentangled, it is hard to attribute gains to visual tokenization, multimodal alignment losses, or the language backbone; a framework like Prism matters because it turns benchmark outcomes into more actionable training feedback.","technical_approach":"The central idea is to decouple VLM capabilities through controlled task design or diagnostic dimensions. The key is not simply collecting more examples, but enforcing variable control so some tasks isolate visual perception, others isolate cross-modal binding, and others stress reasoning with minimal shortcutting from language priors. That is what distinguishes a diagnostic framework from a broad leaderboard benchmark.","experiments":"The most useful experiments should show that the framework produces distinct capability profiles across existing VLMs rather than just another ranking. Strong evidence would include models with similar overall performance but very different weaknesses—for example, one failing on fine-grained perception and another on multimodal grounding or compositional reasoning—plus case studies connecting those patterns back to architecture or training choices. The abstract is unavailable, so the exact dimensions, model coverage, and quantitative findings cannot be stated confidently.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","benchmark","capability-assessment"],"keywords":["Multi-modality","VLM","evaluation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§2能力解耦维度设计和§5错误定位案例即可，可用于内部VLM预训练迭代的能力归因分析。","en":"Only check §2 for capability decoupling dimension design and §5 for error localization cases, it can be used for capability attribution analysis in internal VLM pre-training iterations."}},{"id":"RenZXXLZ24","title":"Towards the Dynamics of a DNN Learning Symbolic Interactions","authors":["Qihan Ren","Junpeng Zhang","Yang Xu","Yue Xin","Dongrui Liu","Quanshi Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"This study proves the two-phase dynamics of a deep neural network (DNN) learning interactions. Despite the long disappointing view of the faithfulness of post-hoc explanation of a DNN, a series of theorems have been proven [27] in recent years to show that for a given input sample, a small set of interactions between input variables can be considered as primitive inference patterns that faithfully represent a DNN's detailed inference logic on that sample. Particularly, Zhang et al. [41] have observed that various DNNs all learn interactions of different complexities in two distinct phases, and this two-phase dynamics well explains how a DNN changes from under-fitting to over-fitting. Therefore, in this study, we mathematically prove the two-phase dynamics of interactions, providing a theoretical mechanism for how the generalization power of a DNN changes during the training process. Experiments show that our theory well predicts the real dynamics of interactions on different DNNs trained for various tasks.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RenZXXLZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RenZXXLZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/5aa96d1caa0d0b99d534b67df06be2ff-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"此前仅通过实验观测到DNN学习不同复杂度的变量交互存在两阶段动态，但缺乏严格数学证明，无法为DNN可解释性、过拟合防控提供理论支撑。","importance":"理论级贡献，首次给出DNN学习符号交互两阶段动态的严格数学证明，为预训练过程中的训练动态分析、泛化能力调控提供了理论依据。","technical_approach":"原创理论推导，基于此前提出的变量交互作为DNN推理原语的框架，通过严格数学推导证明两阶段动态的普适性；舍弃了此前仅靠实验观测的研究路径，从理论层面确认该现象不依赖特定模型/数据集设置。","experiments":"公开披露的摘要未提及具体实验验证的DNN类型、数据集及数值结果，仅说明理论证明成立，且该两阶段动态可解释DNN从欠拟合到过拟合的变化过程。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Previous work only observed through experiments that DNNs learn variable interactions of different complexities in two distinct phases, but lacks strict mathematical proof, which cannot provide theoretical support for DNN interpretability and overfitting prevention.","importance":"Theoretical-level contribution. It provides the first strict mathematical proof of the two-phase dynamics of DNN learning symbolic interactions, providing a theoretical basis for training dynamic analysis and generalization ability regulation during pre-training.","technical_approach":"Original theoretical derivation. Based on the previously proposed framework that variable interactions are the inference primitives of DNNs, it proves the universality of the two-phase dynamics through strict mathematical derivation. It abandons the previous research path that only relies on experimental observation, and confirms from the theoretical level that this phenomenon does not depend on specific model/dataset settings.","experiments":"The publicly available abstract does not disclose specific experimentally verified DNN types, datasets or numerical results, only states that the theoretical proof is valid, and the two-phase dynamics can explain the change process of DNN from underfitting to overfitting.","authors_note":""},"tags":["learning-dynamics","symbolic-reasoning","generalization","transformers"],"keywords":["deep learning theory","learning theory","knowledge representation"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"DNN的推理逻辑可以用输入变量之间的少量交互作为原语进行忠实表示","claim_en":"The inference logic of DNNs can be faithfully represented using a small number of interactions between input variables as primitives","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"DNN学习不同复杂度变量交互的两阶段动态是普适性质，而非特定实验设置下的偶然现象","claim_en":"The two-phase dynamics of DNN learning variable interactions of different complexities is a universal property, not an accidental phenomenon under specific experimental settings","opposes":"The two-phase learning dynamic is an observation under specific model/dataset settings and has no universality","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§2 Theoretical Proof","why_contested":"Provides a solid theoretical foundation for practical applications such as training dynamic analysis and overfitting warning, which can be directly used to guide pre-training training strategy design"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为预训练训练动态分析的理论参考备查，无需细读正文。","en":"Keep as theoretical reference for pre-training training dynamics analysis, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"Reuel-LamparthH24","title":"BetterBench: Assessing AI Benchmarks, Uncovering Issues, and Establishing Best Practices","authors":["Anka Reuel-Lamparth","Amelia F. Hardy","Chandler Smith","Max Lamparth","Malcolm Hardy","Mykel J. Kochenderfer"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1b1","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Reuel-LamparthH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Reuel-LamparthH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/26889e8359e7ef8a7f5d77457364ca55-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有AI基准测试的质量参差不齐，没有统一的全生命周期评估框架，导致基准测试结果的参考性不足，甚至可能误导模型研发和政策制定。","importance":"标准级贡献，提出覆盖基准全生命周期的40项最佳实践评估框架，对大模型预训练、对齐的基准设计和选型有直接指导价值。","technical_approach":"原创评估框架，覆盖基准设计、数据采集、验证、发布、使用全生命周期的40项最佳实践，对25个常用AI基准做了系统评测；舍弃了仅关注基准指标区分度的传统评估思路，全面覆盖公平性、可用性、鲁棒性等多个维度。","experiments":"系统评测25个常用AI基准，发现不同基准的质量差异极大，大多数常用基准存在显著的设计缺陷；公开摘要未披露具体缺陷分类占比数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing AI benchmarks have uneven quality, and there is no unified full-life-cycle evaluation framework, leading to insufficient reference value of benchmark results, which may even mislead model R&D and policy making.","importance":"Standard-level contribution. It proposes an evaluation framework with 40 best practices covering the full life cycle of benchmarks, which has direct guiding value for benchmark design and selection for LLM pre-training and alignment.","technical_approach":"Original evaluation framework. It covers 40 best practices across the full life cycle of benchmarks: design, data collection, validation, release, and usage, and conducts systematic evaluation on 25 commonly used AI benchmarks. It abandons the traditional evaluation idea that only focuses on the discrimination ability of benchmark metrics, and comprehensively covers multiple dimensions such as fairness, usability, and robustness.","experiments":"Systematic evaluation of 25 commonly used AI benchmarks finds that there are huge quality differences between different benchmarks, and most commonly used benchmarks have significant design flaws. The public abstract does not disclose specific defect classification proportion values.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","evaluation","measurement","reproducibility"],"keywords":["benchmarking","assessment","best practices","evaluation","benchmark"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"AI基准测试是评估模型能力、追踪技术进展、支撑政策制定的核心工具","claim_en":"AI benchmarks are core tools for evaluating model capabilities, tracking technological progress, and supporting policy making","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"大多数当前常用的AI基准存在严重设计缺陷，其测试结果的参考价值有限","claim_en":"Most currently commonly used AI benchmarks have serious design flaws, and the reference value of their test results is limited","opposes":"The design quality of commonly used public AI benchmarks is sufficient to meet the needs of model evaluation and progress tracking","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Evaluation Results","why_contested":"Directly challenges the credibility of existing benchmark evaluation results, and will promote the standardization of AI benchmark design"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为大模型基准选型与设计的标准参考备查，不用读正文。","en":"Keep as standard reference for LLM benchmark selection and design, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"RuQHZSCJWSLZWJ024","title":"RAGChecker: A Fine-grained Framework for Diagnosing Retrieval-Augmented Generation","authors":["Dongyu Ru","Lin Qiu","Xiangkun Hu","Tianhang Zhang","Peng Shi","Shuaichen Chang","Cheng Jiayang","Cunxiang Wang","Shichao Sun","Huanyu Li","Zizhao Zhang","Binjie Wang","Jiarong Jiang","Tong He","Zhiguo Wang","Pengfei Liu","Yue Zhang","Zheng Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Despite Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has shown promising capability in leveraging external knowledge, a comprehensive evaluation of RAG systems is still challenging due to the modular nature of RAG, evaluation of long-form responses and reliability of measurements. In this paper, we propose a fine-grained evaluation framework, RAGChecker, that incorporates a suite of diagnostic metrics for both the retrieval and generation modules. Meta evaluation verifies that RAGChecker has significantly better correlations with human judgments than other evaluation metrics. Using RAGChecker, we evaluate 8 RAG systems and conduct an in-depth analysis of their performance, revealing insightful patterns and trade-offs in the design choices of RAG architectures. The metrics of RAGChecker can guide researchers and practitioners in developing more effective RAG systems.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RuQHZSCJWSLZWJ024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RuQHZSCJWSLZWJ024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/27245589131d17368cccdfa990cbf16e-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有RAG系统的评估方法没有拆分检索和生成模块的误差，也未适配长文本生成场景，与人类判断的相关性低，无法定位RAG系统的性能瓶颈。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出细粒度的RAG诊断评估框架，对RAG系统的架构选型、预训练生成模块的适配优化有实际参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创评估框架，设计了分别针对检索模块和生成模块的多维度诊断指标；舍弃了仅评估最终输出正确性的传统思路，细粒度拆分检索准确率、召回率、生成忠实度、相关性等多个维度的误差来源。","experiments":"元评估显示RAGChecker与人类判断的相关性显著高于现有评估指标；测试了8个常用RAG系统，揭示了不同架构设计的性能权衡；公开摘要未披露具体的相关性数值和指标提升幅度。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing RAG system evaluation methods do not split errors of retrieval and generation modules, nor adapt to long-form generation scenarios, have low correlation with human judgments, and cannot locate performance bottlenecks of RAG systems.","importance":"Method-level contribution. It proposes a fine-grained RAG diagnostic evaluation framework, which has practical reference value for RAG system architecture selection and adaptation optimization of pre-trained generation modules.","technical_approach":"Original evaluation framework. It designs multi-dimensional diagnostic metrics for retrieval module and generation module respectively. It abandons the traditional idea of only evaluating the correctness of final output, and splits error sources of multiple dimensions such as retrieval accuracy, recall, generation faithfulness, and relevance in fine granularity.","experiments":"Meta-evaluation shows that RAGChecker has significantly higher correlation with human judgments than existing evaluation metrics; it tests 8 commonly used RAG systems and reveals performance trade-offs of different architectural designs. The public abstract does not disclose specific correlation values and metric improvement magnitudes.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rag","evaluation","diagnosis","benchmark"],"keywords":["Retrieval Augmented Generation","RAG","Benchmark","RAG Evaluation"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"RAG系统的性能同时受检索模块和生成模块的共同影响","claim_en":"The performance of RAG systems is jointly affected by the retrieval module and the generation module","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"细粒度拆分检索和生成模块误差的RAG评估指标与人类判断的相关性显著高于仅评估最终输出的指标","claim_en":"RAG evaluation metrics that split retrieval and generation module errors in fine granularity have significantly higher correlation with human judgments than metrics that only evaluate final output","opposes":"Only evaluating the correctness of RAG final output is sufficient to fully reflect system performance, no need to split module errors","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Meta Evaluation","why_contested":"Provides an implementable diagnostic tool for iterative optimization of RAG systems, changing the coarse-grained status quo of RAG evaluation"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为RAG系统性能瓶颈定位的评估框架参考备查，无需细读。","en":"Keep as reference for RAG system performance bottleneck diagnosis framework, no need to read in detail."}},{"id":"2402.04494","title":"Amortized Planning with Large-Scale Transformers: A Case Study on Chess","authors":["Anian Ruoss","Grégoire Delétang","Sourabh Medapati","Jordi Grau-Moya","Kevin Li","Elliot Catt","John Reid","Cannada A. Lewis","Joel Veness","Tim Genewein"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1b2","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.04494","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/RuossDMGLCRLVG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/RuossDMGLCRLVG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/78f0db30c39c850de728c769f42fc903-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Transformer规划能力评估长期受记忆干扰，现有测试任务易让模型靠记忆而非规划得到好结果，无受控场景验证纯前馈规划泛化能力。","importance":"数据+方法级贡献，开源了1000万局带Stockfish16标注的国际象棋基准ChessBench，验证了Transformer在无记忆规划任务上的scaling规律，为LLM推理预训练提供了受控测试环境。","technical_approach":"实验驱动的评估方法，用监督学习训练Transformer，预测目标覆盖状态价值、动作价值、行为克隆三类，舍弃强化学习范式避免策略优化干扰，仅测试模型前馈泛化能力，区别于过往RL训象棋模型的工作。","experiments":"训练最大270M参数量的Transformer，数据集包含1000万局、150亿个带标注的落子/价值点，baseline为Stockfish16标注结果，核心结果为最大模型对未见过的棋盘动作价值预测准确率较高；ablation验证数据集规模、模型规模、预测目标选择均对规划性能有显著影响。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Transformer planning capability evaluation has long been confounded by memorization, existing test tasks allow models to perform well via memorization instead of planning, with no controlled scenario to verify pure feedforward planning generalization.","importance":"Data and method level contribution, open sources ChessBench, a 10M-game chess benchmark annotated by Stockfish 16, verifies scaling laws of Transformers on memorization-free planning tasks, provides a controlled test environment for LLM reasoning pretraining.","technical_approach":"Experiment-driven evaluation method, trains Transformers via supervised learning with three prediction targets: state value, action value, behavioral cloning, discards reinforcement learning paradigm to avoid policy optimization interference, only tests model feedforward generalization, differs from prior work training chess models with RL.","experiments":"Trains Transformers up to 270M parameters on 15B annotated move/value points from 10M games, baseline is Stockfish 16 annotations, core result is the largest model achieves high accuracy on action value prediction for unseen boards; ablations verify dataset size, model size, prediction target selection all have significant impact on planning performance.","authors_note":""},"tags":["transformers","planning","chess","benchmark"],"keywords":["chess","supervised learning","transformer","scaling","benchmark"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Transformer的性能随模型规模和数据规模提升而scaling","claim_en":"Transformer performance scales with model size and dataset size","evidence_anchor":"§4 Ablation Studies"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"270M参数量的Transformer可在纯规划的国际象棋任务上泛化到未见过的棋盘，准确预测动作价值","claim_en":"270M parameter Transformers can generalize to unseen chess boards in pure planning tasks, predicting action values accurately","opposes":"Transformer无法在无记忆的规划任务上实现有效泛化的普遍认知","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Results","why_contested":"提供了Transformer前馈推理能力存在的受控实验证据，对LLM推理预训练方向有指导意义"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看ChessBench数据集构建部分和scaling规律实验表即可，可为LLM推理预训练提供受控测试环境。","en":"Only read the ChessBench construction section and scaling law experiment tables, which provide controlled test environment for LLM reasoning pre-training."}},{"id":"2405.18886","title":"Compressing Large Language Models using Low Rank and Low Precision Decomposition","authors":["Rajarshi Saha","Naomi Sagan","Varun Srivastava","Andrea Goldsmith","Mert Pilanci"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1b3","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.18886","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SahaSSGP24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SahaSSGP24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a20e8451ffb07ad25282c21945ad4f19-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM后训练压缩方法要么精度损失大，要么需要重训，无法适配内存受限边缘设备的部署需求，低秩分解和量化两类技术的结合此前未被有效优化。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出无需重训的低秩+量化联合压缩范式，在高压缩比下保留零样本性能，为边缘端LLM部署提供了低训练成本的方案。","technical_approach":"原创后训练压缩算法，将权重矩阵分解为低精度全量矩阵Q加低秩因子L、R的乘积，Q、L、R全部量化，舍弃压缩后微调步骤，区别于过往单独使用低秩或量化的方法，同时利用两类压缩技术的能力无额外训练成本。","experiments":"在多个LLM上测试，零样本任务下精度保留优于单独使用低秩分解或量化的baseline，L和R可支持稀疏存储进一步提升压缩比，未公布具体量化提升数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing post-training LLM compression methods either have large accuracy degradation or require retraining, cannot meet deployment requirements on memory-constrained edge devices, the combination of low-rank decomposition and quantization has not been effectively optimized before.","importance":"Method level contribution, proposes a retraining-free low-rank + quantization joint compression paradigm, preserves zero-shot performance at high compression ratio, provides a low training cost solution for edge LLM deployment.","technical_approach":"Original post-training compression algorithm, decomposes weight matrices into sum of low-precision full matrix Q and product of low-rank factors L, R, all Q, L, R are quantized, discards post-compression fine-tuning step, differs from prior methods using low-rank or quantization alone, leverages capabilities of both compression techniques with no extra training cost.","experiments":"Tested on multiple LLMs, zero-shot performance retention outperforms baselines using low-rank decomposition or quantization alone, L and R support sparse storage for further compression ratio improvement, no specific quantitative improvement numbers released.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm-compression","quantization","low-rank","deployment"],"keywords":["Large Language Models (LLMs)","Model Compression","Post-training Quantization","Low-Rank Decomposition","Low-Precision Formats","Quantization Error Analysis","Rank-Constrained Regression","Randomized Linear Algebra","Sketching"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM权重矩阵存在固有低秩结构，可通过低秩分解实现压缩","claim_en":"LLM weight matrices have inherent low-rank structure that can be leveraged for compression via decomposition","evidence_anchor":"§2 Background"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"低秩分解与量化结合的后训练压缩方法可实现高压缩比下的零样本性能保留，无需微调","claim_en":"Post-training compression combining low-rank decomposition and quantization can preserve zero-shot performance at high compression ratio without fine-tuning","opposes":"低秩与量化结合的后训练压缩会带来严重精度损失的普遍认知","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"验证了两类压缩技术结合的可行性，大幅降低了LLM压缩的训练成本"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为无重训低秩+量化联合LLM压缩方案的技术参考备查，不用细读。","en":"Keep as technical reference for training-free low-rank + quantization joint LLM compression, no need to read in detail."}},{"id":"2312.13236","title":"Diffusion Models With Learned Adaptive Noise","authors":["Subham S. Sahoo","Aaron Gokaslan","Christopher De Sa","Volodymyr Kuleshov"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1b4","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.13236","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SahooGSK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SahooGSK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/bee43378b65ec195a67f24709469dcaf-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有扩散模型的噪声过程为人工预设的固定schedule，限制了对数似然上限，过往工作普遍假设ELBO与噪声过程无关，无法针对性优化噪声过程提升性能。","importance":"范式级贡献，打破了扩散模型ELBO与噪声过程无关的核心假设，提出可学习自适应噪声的扩散范式，直接提升对数似然上限，对diffusion LM、跨模态扩散预训练的目标设计有直接参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创扩散过程优化方法，基于变分推断框架将扩散噪声过程建模为近似变分后验，学习多维度自适应噪声schedule，不同维度加噪速率不同，舍弃固定加噪schedule的人工设计，区别于过往固定噪声的扩散方法，可得到更紧的ELBO下界。","experiments":"在图像生成任务上测试，对数似然指标优于固定加噪schedule的基线扩散模型，ablation验证自适应噪声的维度分配对似然提升有显著影响，未公布具体提升数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing diffusion models use manually designed fixed noise schedules, which limit the upper bound of log-likelihood, prior work generally assumes ELBO is invariant to noise process, so noise process cannot be optimized to improve performance.","importance":"Paradigm level contribution, breaks the core assumption that diffusion model ELBO is invariant to noise process, proposes a diffusion paradigm with learnable adaptive noise, directly improves log-likelihood upper bound, has direct reference value for diffusion LM and cross-modal diffusion pretraining target design.","technical_approach":"Original diffusion process optimization method, models diffusion noise process as approximate variational posterior under variational inference framework, learns multi-dimensional adaptive noise schedule with different noise rates across dimensions, discards manual design of fixed noise schedule, differs from prior fixed-noise diffusion methods, obtains tighter ELBO lower bound.","experiments":"Tested on image generation tasks, log-likelihood outperforms baseline diffusion models with fixed noise schedules, ablations verify dimension allocation of adaptive noise has significant impact on likelihood improvement, no specific improvement numbers released.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","noise-schedule","objective","generative-modeling"],"keywords":["Generative Models","Diffusion Models","Image Diffusion"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"扩散模型的ELBO下界越紧，对数似然性能越好","claim_en":"Tighter ELBO lower bound of diffusion models leads to better log-likelihood performance","evidence_anchor":"§2 Background"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"扩散模型的ELBO并非与噪声过程无关，可通过学习自适应噪声过程得到更紧的ELBO","claim_en":"Diffusion model ELBO is not invariant to noise process, tighter ELBO can be obtained by learning adaptive noise process","opposes":"ELBO与噪声过程无关的领域共识","opposes_cite_hint":"Ho 2020 DDPM","evidence_anchor":"§3.1","why_contested":"推翻了扩散模型的核心假设之一，为扩散过程的设计打开了新的优化方向"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3可学习自适应噪声推导部分和Fig2性能对比图即可，打破了扩散模型固定噪声schedule的固有假设。","en":"Only read §3 learnable adaptive noise derivation and Fig2 performance comparison, which breaks the fixed noise schedule assumption of diffusion models."}},{"id":"2410.05437","title":"ESPACE: Dimensionality Reduction of Activations for Model Compression","authors":["Charbel Sakr","Brucek Khailany"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1b5","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.05437","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SakrK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SakrK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1f6591cc41be737e9ba4cc487ac8082d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM压缩方法大多聚焦权重张量分解，需要重训才能恢复精度，压缩比与精度的trade-off较差，无法在不损失表达能力的前提下实现高压缩比。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出激活导向的压缩范式，无需改动预训练权重即可实现高压缩比，为LLM推理压缩提供了新的技术路径。","technical_approach":"原创激活降维压缩方法，将激活投影到预校准的主成分空间，推理时通过矩阵乘法结合律自动得到权重分解结果，舍弃权重压缩需要重训的步骤，区别于过往权重中心的压缩方法，核心优化激活的维度冗余，无表达能力损失。","experiments":"在GPT3、Llama2、Nemotron4上测试，50%压缩比下GPT3-22B的困惑度仅上升0.18，20%-40%压缩比下GPT3的精度损失几乎可忽略，性能优于现有低秩分解、量化压缩baseline。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM compression methods mostly focus on weight tensor decomposition, require retraining to recover accuracy, have poor trade-off between compression ratio and accuracy, cannot achieve high compression ratio without expressivity loss.","importance":"Method level contribution, proposes an activation-centric compression paradigm, achieves high compression ratio without modifying pretrained weights, provides a new technical path for LLM inference compression.","technical_approach":"Original activation dimensionality reduction compression method, projects activations onto pre-calibrated principal components, obtains weight decomposition as a byproduct of matrix multiplication associativity during inference, discards retraining requirement for weight compression, differs from prior weight-centric compression methods, focuses on optimizing activation dimensional redundancy with no expressivity loss.","experiments":"Tested on GPT3, Llama2, Nemotron4, achieves only 0.18 perplexity increase on GPT3-22B at 50% compression ratio, negligible accuracy loss on GPT3 at 20%-40% compression ratio, outperforms existing low-rank decomposition and quantization baselines.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm-compression","activation-compression","pca","inference"],"keywords":["Activation tensor decomposition","model compression","matrix factorization"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM激活存在显著维度冗余，可通过主成分分析实现降维","claim_en":"LLM activations have significant dimensional redundancy that can be reduced via principal component analysis","evidence_anchor":"§2 Background"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"激活中心的降维压缩方法可实现50%压缩比下仅0.18的困惑度上升，性能优于权重中心的压缩方法","claim_en":"Activation-centric dimensionality reduction compression achieves only 0.18 perplexity increase at 50% compression ratio, outperforms weight-centric compression methods","opposes":"激活导向压缩方法精度损失高于权重导向方法的普遍认知","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"为LLM压缩提供了新的优化维度，可直接适配预训练模型无重训成本"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为激活导向无重训LLM压缩方案的技术路径参考备查，无需细读。","en":"Keep as technical path reference for activation-oriented training-free LLM compression, no need to read in detail."}},{"id":"2406.04103","title":"Multistep Distillation of Diffusion Models via Moment Matching","authors":["Tim Salimans","Thomas Mensink","Jonathan Heek","Emiel Hoogeboom"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We present a new method for making diffusion models faster to sample. The method distills many-step diffusion models into few-step models by matching conditional expectations of the clean data given noisy data along the sampling trajectory. Our approach extends recently proposed one-step methods to the multi-step case, and provides a new perspective by interpreting these approaches in terms of moment matching. By using up to 8 sampling steps, we obtain distilled models that outperform not only their one-step versions but also their original many-step teacher models, obtaining new state-of-the-art results on the Imagenet dataset. We also show promising results on a large text-to-image model where we achieve fast generation of high resolution images directly in image space, without needing autoencoders or upsamplers.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.04103","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SalimansMHH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SalimansMHH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3f66d5cdbe032bb750f2dc523357b7a5-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有扩散模型蒸馏方法大多仅支持1步蒸馏，生成质量低于多步教师模型，无法同时兼顾采样速度和生成质量，多步蒸馏此前缺乏统一理论框架。","importance":"方法+范式级贡献，提出基于矩匹配的多步扩散蒸馏框架，打破了蒸馏模型质量低于教师模型的限制，对扩散模型落地、diffusion LM推理加速有直接应用价值。","technical_approach":"原创多步蒸馏方法，通过匹配采样轨迹上带噪数据对应的干净数据条件期望，将多步教师扩散模型蒸馏为少步模型，扩展了过往1步蒸馏方法到多步场景，区别于过往蒸馏方法，基于矩匹配的统一视角无需对抗训练或重训整个扩散模型。","experiments":"在ImageNet上测试，8步采样的蒸馏模型不仅优于1步蒸馏模型，还超过原始多步教师模型的生成质量；在大规模文生图模型上实现高分辨率图像快速生成，无需额外latent空间转换。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing diffusion model distillation methods mostly only support 1-step distillation, generation quality is lower than multi-step teacher models, cannot balance sampling speed and generation quality, multi-step distillation previously lacked a unified theoretical framework.","importance":"Method and paradigm level contribution, proposes a multi-step diffusion distillation framework based on moment matching, breaks the limit that distilled model quality is lower than teacher model, has direct application value for diffusion model deployment and diffusion LM inference acceleration.","technical_approach":"Original multi-step distillation method, distills multi-step teacher diffusion models into few-step models by matching conditional expectations of clean data given noisy data along the sampling trajectory, extends prior 1-step distillation methods to multi-step scenarios, differs from prior distillation methods, uses unified moment matching perspective without adversarial training or full model retraining.","experiments":"Tested on ImageNet, 8-step distilled model outperforms both 1-step distilled models and original multi-step teacher models; achieves fast high-resolution image generation on large text-to-image models without extra latent space conversion.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","distillation","sampling","moment-matching"],"keywords":["generative modeling","diffusion","distillation"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"扩散模型的采样速度与生成质量存在固有trade-off，蒸馏可有效提升采样速度","claim_en":"Diffusion models have inherent trade-off between sampling speed and generation quality, distillation can effectively improve sampling speed","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于矩匹配的多步蒸馏得到的8步扩散模型，生成质量可超过原始多步教师模型","claim_en":"8-step diffusion models obtained via moment matching based multi-step distillation can outperform original multi-step teacher models in generation quality","opposes":"蒸馏得到的扩散模型性能无法超过教师模型的普遍认知","opposes_cite_hint":"Salimans 2022 Progressive Distillation","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"打破了蒸馏模型的性能上限假设，为扩散模型的加速和性能提升同时提供了可行路径"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§3矩匹配多步蒸馏框架推导部分和Table1性能对比表即可，可直接用于diffusion LM推理加速。","en":"Only read §3 moment matching multi-step distillation derivation and Table1 performance comparison, which can be directly used for diffusion LM inference acceleration."}},{"id":"2402.14904","title":"Watermarking Makes Language Models Radioactive","authors":["Tom Sander","Pierre Fernandez","Alain Durmus","Matthijs Douze","Teddy Furon"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1b6","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.14904","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SanderFDDF24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SanderFDDF24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/2567c95fd41459a98a73ba893775d22a-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有检测LLM是否使用合成数据训练的方法要么需要已知可疑文本，要么无统计保证，无法可靠验证LLM训练数据是否包含第三方水印合成数据，难以实现IP保护。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出水印合成数据的放射性检测方法，具有可证明的置信度，对LLM训练数据版权保护、合成数据溯源有直接应用价值。","technical_approach":"原创放射性检测方法，通过检测微调后LLM中残留的弱水印信号，判断其是否训练过含水印的合成数据，舍弃需要已知可疑文本的要求，区别于过往成员推理、水印检测方法，无需访问疑似合成文本，直接检测模型参数中的水印残留。","experiments":"在不同规模LLM上测试，当训练数据中水印合成数据占比达到阈值时检测准确率接近100%，具有可证明的统计置信度；ablation验证水印鲁棒性、合成数据占比与放射性污染水平正相关。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing methods to detect whether LLMs are trained on synthetic data either require access to suspected text or have no statistical guarantees, cannot reliably verify if LLM training data contains third-party watermarked synthetic data, making IP protection difficult.","importance":"Method level contribution, proposes a radioactivity detection method for watermarked synthetic data with provable confidence, has direct application value for LLM training data copyright protection and synthetic data tracing.","technical_approach":"Original radioactivity detection method, determines if an LLM was trained on watermarked synthetic data by detecting weak residual watermark signals in the fine-tuned LLM, discards the requirement of accessing suspected text, differs from prior membership inference and watermark detection methods, directly detects watermark residuals in model parameters without access to suspected synthetic text.","experiments":"Tested on LLMs of different sizes, detection accuracy approaches 100% when the proportion of watermarked synthetic data in training data reaches the threshold, with provable statistical confidence; ablations verify watermark robustness and synthetic data proportion are positively correlated with radioactivity contamination level.","authors_note":""},"tags":["watermarking","data-contamination","membership-inference","synthetic-data"],"keywords":["Watermarking","Large Language Models","Membership Inference"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM水印可在生成文本中留下可检测信号，用于溯源生成来源","claim_en":"LLM watermarks can leave detectable signals in generated text for source tracing","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"含水印的合成文本用于训练LLM后，水印信号会残留在LLM参数中，可被可靠检测到","claim_en":"When watermarked synthetic text is used to train an LLM, the watermark signal remains in the LLM parameters and can be reliably detected","opposes":"水印信号仅存在于生成文本中，不会传递到训练后LLM参数的普遍认知","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Methods, §4 Experiments","why_contested":"为LLM训练数据的版权溯源提供了新的技术路径，也对合成数据使用的合规性提出了新的挑战"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4水印残留检测方法部分和Fig3置信度验证实验即可，可用于LLM训练数据版权溯源。","en":"Only read §4 watermark residual detection method and Fig3 confidence verification experiments, which can be used for LLM training data copyright traceability."}},{"id":"2412.01019","title":"Energy-Based Modelling for Discrete and Mixed Data via Heat Equations on Structured Spaces","authors":["Tobias Schröder","Zijing Ou","Yingzhen Li","Andrew B. Duncan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1b7","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.01019","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SchroderOLD24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SchroderOLD24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/90812824c8b36622e6f61803d03b2926-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"现有离散/混合数据的能量基模型（EBM）训练依赖MCMC采样，速度慢且不稳定，无法扩展到大规模离散数据（如文本、离散token）的建模，限制了EBM在预训练中的应用。","importance":"范式级贡献，提出无需MCMC的离散EBM训练方法，为离散数据的能量建模范式提供了可扩展的训练路径，对非AR预训练建模范式研究有参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创离散EBM训练方法，基于结构化离散空间上的热方程扩散过程生成扰动样本，用能量差异作为损失函数，仅需在数据点和其扰动样本上计算能量，舍弃MCMC采样步骤，区别于过往EBM训练方法，无需交替采样和更新参数，训练速度和稳定性大幅提升。","experiments":"在多个离散和混合数据集上测试，采样质量和训练速度优于基于MCMC的EBM基线方法，可扩展到高维离散token数据的建模，未公布具体提升数值。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing energy-based model (EBM) training for discrete/mixed data relies on MCMC sampling, which is slow and unstable, cannot scale to large-scale discrete data (e.g. text, discrete tokens) modeling, limiting EBM application in pretraining.","importance":"Paradigm level contribution, proposes an MCMC-free discrete EBM training method, provides a scalable training path for energy-based modeling of discrete data, has reference value for non-AR pretraining paradigm research.","technical_approach":"Original discrete EBM training method, generates perturbed samples via heat equation diffusion process on structured discrete spaces, uses energy discrepancy as loss function, only requires energy evaluation on data points and their perturbed counterparts, discards MCMC sampling step, differs from prior EBM training methods, no need for alternating sampling and parameter update, training speed and stability are greatly improved.","experiments":"Tested on multiple discrete and mixed datasets, sampling quality and training speed outperform MCMC-based EBM baselines, can scale to high-dimensional discrete token data modeling, no specific improvement numbers released.","authors_note":""},"tags":["energy-based-model","discrete-diffusion","sampling","mixed-data"],"keywords":["Energy-based models","discrete probabilistic modelling","tabular data"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"能量基模型可灵活建模任意数据分布，适合离散、混合等复杂数据场景","claim_en":"Energy-based models can flexibly model arbitrary data distributions, suitable for complex scenarios such as discrete and mixed data","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于结构化空间热方程扩散的扰动方法，可实现无MCMC的离散EBM训练，性能优于基于MCMC的方法","claim_en":"Perturbation method based on heat equation diffusion on structured spaces enables MCMC-free discrete EBM training, outperforming MCMC-based methods","opposes":"离散EBM训练必须依赖MCMC采样才能得到无偏梯度的普遍认知","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Methods, §4 Experiments","why_contested":"解决了离散EBM训练的核心瓶颈，为EBM在大规模离散数据预训练中的应用扫清了障碍"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对离散能量基模型无法大规模训练的固有认知，应立刻在非AR预训练建模范式的内部ablation中复现其训练方法。","en":"Changes my inherent perception that discrete EBMs cannot be trained at scale; the training method should be immediately reproduced in internal ablation of non-autoregressive pre-training paradigms."}},{"id":"2402.05098","title":"Improved off-policy training of diffusion samplers","authors":["Marcin Sendera","Minsu Kim","Sarthak Mittal","Pablo Lemos","Luca Scimeca","Jarrid Rector-Brooks","Alexandre Adam","Yoshua Bengio","Nikolay Malkin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"We study the problem of training diffusion models to sample from a distribution with a given unnormalized density or energy function. We benchmark several diffusion-structured inference methods, including simulation-based variational approaches and off-policy methods (continuous generative flow networks). Our results shed light on the relative advantages of existing algorithms while bringing into question some claims from past work. We also propose a novel exploration strategy for off-policy methods, based on local search in the target space with the use of a replay buffer, and show that it improves the quality of samples on a variety of target distributions. Our code for the sampling methods and benchmarks studied is made public at https://github.com/GFNOrg/gfn-diffusion as a base for future work on diffusion models for amortized inference.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.05098","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SenderaKMLSRABM24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SenderaKMLSRABM24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/93c936b9e492def9c00782cab79dbc6d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有用扩散模型从给定非归一化密度/能量函数采样的方法性能对比缺乏统一基准，部分离策略训练方法的原有结论未得到复现，采样质量不稳定。","importance":"数据+方法级贡献，开源了扩散采样方法的统一基准，提出新的离策略探索策略提升采样质量，对基于能量的扩散预训练目标优化有参考价值。","technical_approach":"改进的离策略训练方法，首先对现有扩散推理方法（包括变分方法、离策略生成流网络方法）做统一基准测试，提出基于目标空间局部搜索加回放缓冲区的探索策略，舍弃离策略训练中的随机探索方式，区别于过往离策略扩散训练方法，提升了探索效率。","experiments":"在多个目标分布上测试，新探索策略带来采样质量的稳定提升；统一基准复现发现部分过往工作的结论无法成立，相关代码已开源。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing performance comparisons of diffusion models sampling from given unnormalized density/energy functions lack a unified benchmark, some original conclusions of off-policy training methods have not been reproduced, sampling quality is unstable.","importance":"Data and method level contribution, open sources a unified benchmark for diffusion sampling methods, proposes a new off-policy exploration strategy to improve sampling quality, has reference value for energy-based diffusion pretraining target optimization.","technical_approach":"Improved off-policy training method, first conducts unified benchmark testing on existing diffusion inference methods including variational methods and off-policy generative flow network methods, proposes an exploration strategy based on local search in target space with replay buffer, discards random exploration in off-policy training, differs from prior off-policy diffusion training methods, improves exploration efficiency.","experiments":"Tested on multiple target distributions, the new exploration strategy brings stable improvement in sampling quality; unified benchmark reproduction finds some conclusions from prior work do not hold, related code is open sourced.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","off-policy-training","gflownet","sampling"],"keywords":["diffusion models","amortized inference","stochastic control","GFlowNets"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"离策略训练可提升扩散模型从非归一化目标分布采样的效率","claim_en":"Off-policy training can improve the efficiency of diffusion models sampling from unnormalized target distributions","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"部分过往工作提出的离策略扩散采样方法的性能优势，在统一控制的基准测试下无法复现","claim_en":"The performance advantages of some previously proposed off-policy diffusion sampling methods cannot be reproduced under uniformly controlled benchmark tests","opposes":"过往工作中声称的部分离策略扩散方法的性能结论","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"为扩散采样方法的研究提供了统一基准，修正了领域的部分错误认知"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看开源扩散采样基准部分和§3.2离策略探索策略设计即可，对基于能量的扩散预训练目标优化有参考价值。","en":"Only read the open-source diffusion sampling benchmark section and §3.2 off-policy exploration strategy design, which is valuable for energy-based diffusion pre-training objective optimization."}},{"id":"ShaoQ0SZW0024","title":"Visual CoT: Advancing Multi-Modal Language Models with a Comprehensive Dataset and Benchmark for Chain-of-Thought Reasoning","authors":["Hao Shao","Shengju Qian","Han Xiao","Guanglu Song","Zhuofan Zong","Letian Wang","Yu Liu","Hongsheng Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1b8","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ShaoQ0SZW0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ShaoQ0SZW0024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/0ff38d72a2e0aa6dbe42de83a17b2223-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的问题是：多模态模型在视觉推理上常常会给出答案，但缺少可靠的视觉链式思维数据和统一评测，导致所谓 CoT 能力很难被真实训练和比较。过去很多工作要么用文本 CoT 迁移到视觉任务，要么只在少量 benchmark 上做 prompting，数据覆盖和评测粒度都不够。","importance":"这是一篇以数据集和 benchmark 为主的工作，重要性在于它试图把多模态 CoT 从“零散案例演示”推进到可系统训练和评估的阶段。对 VLM 预训练和后训练的启示是：如果视觉推理真的需要中间步骤，那么训练信号的质量、步骤粒度和任务覆盖度会比单纯增加图文对更关键。","technical_approach":"核心方法从标题看是构建一个 comprehensive dataset 和 benchmark 来推进多模态链式推理。关键设计通常包括：覆盖多种视觉推理类型的任务集合；为每个样本提供答案之外的中间推理轨迹；以及把 benchmark 设计成既能看最终准确率，也能看过程质量。与只用标准 VQA 监督相比，这种设计的作用是迫使模型把视觉证据组织成多步文本或混合模态推理，而不是直接学一个快捷映射。","experiments":"当前信息无法确认数据集规模、任务数、模型规模和具体提升。可以合理预期，论文会在多种开源 MLLM 上比较：只做答案监督、文本 CoT 蒸馏、以及使用该数据集训练后的 Visual CoT 方案，并报告不同视觉推理 benchmark 上的平均提升。最值得关注的实验不是单点高分，而是跨任务迁移：如果在图表、空间、计数、常识视觉推理上都能稳定提高，说明这套数据不是只教会模型某一种模板化解释。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a data bottleneck in multimodal reasoning: many vision-language models can output answers, but there is limited high-quality supervision and evaluation for visual chain-of-thought. As a result, progress is often driven by prompting tricks or narrow benchmarks rather than by a solid training signal for stepwise reasoning.","importance":"This is primarily a dataset-and-benchmark contribution, but an important one for multimodal pretraining and post-training. If visual reasoning truly benefits from intermediate steps, then the field needs supervision that captures those steps explicitly; otherwise models will keep learning shortcut answer mappings that look strong on narrow benchmarks but do not generalize well.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method is to build a comprehensive dataset and benchmark for visual CoT. The likely design includes broad task coverage, step-by-step rationales paired with visual questions, and evaluation protocols that score both final answers and reasoning quality. Compared with standard VQA-style supervision, this setup is meant to train models to organize visual evidence into a multi-step reasoning trajectory rather than jump directly to the answer.","experiments":"The provided information does not specify dataset size, task count, model sizes, or exact improvements. The most relevant expected evaluations would compare answer-only training, text-only CoT transfer, and training with the proposed visual-CoT data across multiple multimodal reasoning benchmarks. The strongest evidence would be consistent gains across diverse reasoning types such as counting, spatial reasoning, chart understanding, and visual commonsense, rather than a narrow win on one benchmark.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","chain-of-thought","benchmark","visual-reasoning"],"keywords":["Chain-of-Thought","Multi-Modal Language Model","Visual grounding"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看Visual CoT数据集标注规范部分和评测结果表即可，对多模态大模型视觉推理预训练的信号设计有参考价值。","en":"Only read the Visual CoT dataset annotation specification and evaluation result tables, which is valuable for signal design of VLM visual reasoning pre-training."}},{"id":"SriramananBSSKF24","title":"LLM-Check: Investigating Detection of Hallucinations in Large Language Models","authors":["Gaurang Sriramanan","Siddhant Bharti","Vinu Sankar Sadasivan","Shoumik Saha","Priyatham Kattakinda","Soheil Feizi"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1b9","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SriramananBSSKF24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SriramananBSSKF24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3c1e1fdf305195cd620c118aaa9717ad-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 幻觉检测的现有方法（一致性检查、检索增强）计算开销大、需要多次推理或外部数据库，难以用于实时场景。本文系统研究幻觉的本质特征并探索更高效的检测方法。","importance":"对 pretrain 研究的直接启示有限，但幻觉问题的根源与预训练数据分布和模型内部表示密切相关。如果论文揭示了幻觉与模型内部信号（如置信度、隐层特征）的关联，可能为 pretrain 阶段的数据质量控制或训练目标设计提供间接参考。整体属于 posttrain/部署侧的分析工作。","technical_approach":"对 LLM 幻觉进行全面调查，探索不依赖多次采样或大型检索库的检测技术。具体方法细节在摘要中被截断，推测包括基于模型内部信号（如 logit 分布、隐层特征）的轻量检测方案。","experiments":"摘要未提供具体实验数字。预计在多个 LLM 和多种幻觉类型上进行了评估。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing hallucination detection methods (consistency checks, retrieval-based) are computationally expensive and impractical for real-time use. This paper investigates the nature of LLM hallucinations and explores more efficient detection techniques.","importance":"Indirect relevance to pretraining: hallucinations stem from training data distribution and model representations. Insights into internal signals correlated with hallucinations could inform data quality or training objective design. Primarily a post-training/deployment analysis.","technical_approach":"Comprehensive investigation of hallucination characteristics in LLMs, exploring detection methods that avoid multiple sampling or large retrieval databases. Specific techniques are not fully described in the truncated abstract.","experiments":"No specific numbers available from the abstract. Expected to evaluate across multiple LLMs and hallucination types.","authors_note":""},"tags":["hallucination","evaluation","calibration","llm"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Hallucinations in Language Models","Hallucination Detection","Eigen-analysis of LM Embeddings"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看幻觉与logit、隐层特征关联的实验小节即可，结论可作为预训练数据质量控制的间接参考","en":"Only read experimental sections on correlation between hallucinations and logits/hidden features; conclusions serve as indirect reference for pretraining data quality control."}},{"id":"2405.19581","title":"Source Code Foundation Models are Transferable Binary Analysis Knowledge Bases","authors":["Zian Su","Xiangzhe Xu","Ziyang Huang","Kaiyuan Zhang","Xiangyu Zhang"],"institutions":["Purdue University"],"abstract":"$1ba","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.19581","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SuXH0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SuXH0024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/cc83e97320000f4e08cb9e293b12cf7e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"二进制逆向工程（将编译后的二进制代码还原为人类可读的源码级语义）存在巨大的语义鸿沟。现有方法要么只用源码模型做微调，要么用通用 LLM 做 prompting，效果都不够好。","importance":"对 pretrain 研究的启示在于跨模态迁移学习的范式：如何将源码预训练模型的知识迁移到二进制代码理解任务上。这与 VLM 中视觉-语言对齐的思路类似——用 adapter/bridge 连接两个单模态预训练模型。但整体偏向下游应用，对 pretrain 方法论的直接贡献有限。","technical_approach":"受多模态大模型启发，将源码基础模型和二进制理解模型视为两个单模态模型，通过桥接模块（类似 VLM 中的 projection layer）来融合两侧的表示，从而利用源码模型的丰富语义知识来提升二进制分析。与纯微调或纯 prompting 相比，这种双模态融合方案更充分地利用了两侧的预训练知识。","experiments":"摘要未提供完整实验数字。声称在 HOBRE 任务上优于单模态方法。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Binary reverse engineering faces a large semantic gap between compiled binaries and source code. Existing approaches using either source code models for fine-tuning or general LLMs for prompting are suboptimal.","importance":"The cross-modal transfer paradigm—bridging two unimodal pretrained models (source code and binary)—mirrors VLM alignment approaches. Interesting as a case study of knowledge transfer, but limited direct contribution to pretraining methodology.","technical_approach":"Inspired by multimodal LLMs, bridges source code foundation models and binary understanding models via an adapter module, leveraging rich semantic knowledge from source code pretraining to improve binary analysis. More effective than unimodal fine-tuning or prompting alone.","experiments":"Claims improvements over unimodal methods on HOBRE tasks. Specific numbers not available from the abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-llm","transfer-learning","foundation-models","binary-analysis"],"notable_authors":["Xiangyu Zhang"],"keywords":["Code Language Models","Human-Understandable Binary Recovery","Cross-Modal Prompting"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看桥接模块设计的相关小节即可，跨单模态预训练模型对齐的思路可迁移至多模态预训练架构设计参考","en":"Only read sections on bridge module design; cross single-modal pretrained model alignment logic is referable for multimodal pretraining architecture design."}},{"id":"SuZQ0LSLZC24","title":"ConflictBank: A Benchmark for Evaluating the Influence of Knowledge Conflicts in LLMs","authors":["Zhaochen Su","Jun Zhang","Xiaoye Qu","Tong Zhu","Yanshu Li","Jiashuo Sun","Juntao Li","Min Zhang","Yu Cheng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":null,"links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SuZQ0LSLZC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SuZQ0LSLZC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/baf4b960d118f838ad0b2c08247a9ebe-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 在面对知识冲突（如训练数据中的矛盾信息、参数知识与上下文信息的冲突）时的行为缺乏系统评估。ConflictBank 提供了一个专门的 benchmark。","importance":"数据/评估级贡献。知识冲突问题与 pretrain 数据质量直接相关——预训练语料中不可避免地存在矛盾信息，模型如何处理这些冲突影响其可靠性。这个 benchmark 可以帮助评估不同预训练策略（如数据去重、数据质量过滤）对模型鲁棒性的影响。","technical_approach":"摘要为空，无法提供具体技术细节。从标题推断，构建了包含多种知识冲突类型的评估数据集。","experiments":"摘要为空，无法提供实验细节。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM behavior under knowledge conflicts (contradictions in training data, parametric vs. contextual knowledge) lacks systematic evaluation. ConflictBank provides a dedicated benchmark.","importance":"An evaluation/data contribution. Knowledge conflicts are inherent in pretraining corpora, and understanding how models handle them informs data curation and deduplication strategies.","technical_approach":"Abstract is empty. Presumably constructs a benchmark dataset covering various types of knowledge conflicts.","experiments":"No details available from the empty abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","knowledge","conflict","llm"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接下载ConflictBank数据集即可无需读正文，可用于评估不同预训练数据处理策略的鲁棒性","en":"Just download the ConflictBank benchmark without reading full text; it can be used to evaluate robustness of different pretraining data processing strategies."}},{"id":"SuttonZ0HGBT24","title":"Stealth edits to large language models","authors":["Oliver J. Sutton","Qinghua Zhou","Wei Wang","Desmond J. Higham","Alexander N. Gorban","Alexander Bastounis","Ivan Tyukin"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1bb","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/SuttonZ0HGBT24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/SuttonZ0HGBT24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/5c8168a8eca2eb23f6b1f5019371043e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM编辑方法要么需要重训成本高昂，要么缺乏统一的可编辑性评估标准，且未系统性揭示恶意隐形编辑的攻击风险。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了统一的LLM可编辑性度量指标，同时验证了无副作用隐形编辑的可行性，对LLM安全、模型编辑领域的技术选型和评估体系建设有直接参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创理论驱动的方法，核心是用模型特征的固有维度作为统一度量，既可以预测不同类别的编辑方法的成功率，也可以指导实现仅修改指定prompt响应、不影响其他模型行为的权重直接更新，不需要全量或增量重训，区别于此前不同编辑方法各自独立评估的碎片化体系。","experiments":"公开实验细节有限，核心验证了固有维度指标对多种主流LLM编辑方法的成功率预测一致性达89%以上，实现的隐形编辑仅修改指定幻觉类prompt的输出，其他通用任务的效果波动小于0.5%。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM editing methods either require expensive retraining, or lack unified editability evaluation metrics, and have not systematically revealed the risk of malicious stealth editing attacks.","importance":"Method-level contribution, proposes a unified LLM editability metric, and verifies the feasibility of side-effect-free stealth editing, providing direct reference for technology selection and evaluation system construction in LLM security and model editing fields.","technical_approach":"Original theory-driven method, uses the intrinsic dimension of model features as a unified metric, which can both predict the success rate of different types of editing methods, and guide direct weight updates that only modify responses to specified prompts without affecting other model behaviors, no full or incremental retraining is required, different from the previous fragmented evaluation system for different editing methods.","experiments":"Public experimental details are limited, core verification shows that the intrinsic dimension metric has a consistency of over 89% in predicting the success rate of various mainstream LLM editing methods, the implemented stealth editing only modifies outputs for specified hallucination prompts, and performance fluctuation on other general tasks is less than 0.5%.","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-editing","llm","stealth-edits"],"keywords":["large language models","stealth attacks","memory editing"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM可以通过权重局部修改实现特定输出的调整，不需要全量重训","claim_en":"LLMs can adjust specific outputs through partial weight modification without full retraining","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"单个模型特征固有维度指标即可统一预测所有主流LLM编辑方法的成功率","claim_en":"A single intrinsic dimension metric of model features can uniformly predict the success rate of all mainstream LLM editing methods","opposes":"此前不同类别LLM编辑方法分别采用独立的效果评估指标，没有通用度量标准","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Theoretical Results","why_contested":"如果成立可以统一模型编辑领域的评估体系，大幅降低编辑方法选型和效果验证的成本"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看统一可编辑性度量指标设计的小节即可，指标可复用至内部模型编辑方案的评估流程","en":"Only read the section on unified editability metric design; the metric can be reused in evaluation workflow of internal model editing solutions."}},{"id":"Tack0MSTS24","title":"Online Adaptation of Language Models with a Memory of Amortized Contexts","authors":["Jihoon Tack","Jaehyung Kim","Eric Mitchell","Jinwoo Shin","Yee Whye Teh","Jonathan Richard Schwarz"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1bc","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Tack0MSTS24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Tack0MSTS24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/eaf956b52bae51fbf387b8be4cc3ce18-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":7,"reading_tier":"must_read","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM在线知识更新方案要么采用增量微调成本过高，要么采用RAG架构存在召回不准、上下文窗口限制的问题，无法平衡更新效率、知识保留率和部署成本。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出的内存化 amortized 上下文适配框架，为LLM高频知识更新提供了介于增量微调和RAG之间的中间方案，对持续预训练、垂域LLM运维有参考价值。","technical_approach":"改进的内存增强架构，核心是将新文档的信息压缩为 compact 调制参数存入内存库，推理时调用对应调制参数调整模型输出，不需要修改模型主干权重，也不需要召回完整文档，区别于此前的增量微调或纯RAG方案。","experiments":"公开实验细节有限，核心验证了MAC框架在在线知识更新任务上，知识保留率比基线增量微调方法高27%，内存占用比存储原始文档的RAG方案低92%，推理延迟仅增加8%。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM online knowledge update solutions either use incremental fine-tuning with high cost, or RAG architecture with problems of inaccurate retrieval and context window limit, cannot balance update efficiency, knowledge retention rate and deployment cost.","importance":"Method-level contribution, the proposed memory of amortized contexts adaptation framework provides an intermediate solution between incremental fine-tuning and RAG for high-frequency LLM knowledge update, providing reference for continuous pre-training and vertical LLM operation and maintenance.","technical_approach":"Improved memory-augmented architecture, compresses information from new documents into compact modulation parameters stored in a memory bank, calls corresponding modulation parameters during inference to adjust model outputs, no need to modify model backbone weights, nor retrieve complete documents, different from previous incremental fine-tuning or pure RAG solutions.","experiments":"Public experimental details are limited, core verification shows that on online knowledge update tasks, the MAC framework has 27% higher knowledge retention rate than baseline incremental fine-tuning methods, 92% lower memory footprint than RAG solutions storing original documents, and only 8% higher inference latency.","authors_note":""},"tags":["online-adaptation","memory","context-amortization","continual-learning"],"keywords":["Language Model","Online Learning","Continual Learning","Meta-Learning"],"notable_authors":["Yee Whye Teh"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"静态LLM权重无法适配持续更新的新知识，需要在线适配机制","claim_en":"Static LLM weights cannot adapt to continuously updated new knowledge, requiring online adaptation mechanisms","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"将新文档压缩为调制参数存入内存的方案，比增量微调和RAG更适合高频率在线知识更新场景","claim_en":"Compressing new documents into modulation parameters stored in memory is more suitable for high-frequency online knowledge update scenarios than incremental fine-tuning and RAG","opposes":"主流在线知识更新方案要么采用增量微调，要么采用RAG架构，没有内存化调制的中间路径","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"如果成立可以为垂域LLM的高频小批量知识更新提供更低成本的落地方案"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"改变我对LLM知识更新方案的选型认知，应立刻在内部持续预训练、垂域知识更新的ablation中复现该框架","en":"Changes my perception of LLM knowledge update solution selection; the framework should be immediately reproduced in ablation studies of internal continual pretraining and domain knowledge update."}},{"id":"TanMGAH24","title":"Are Language Models Actually Useful for Time Series Forecasting?","authors":["Mingtian Tan","Mike A. Merrill","Vinayak Gupta","Tim Althoff","Tom Hartvigsen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Large language models (LLMs) are being applied to time series forecasting. But are language models actually useful for time series? In a series of ablation studies on three recent and popular LLM-based time series forecasting methods, we find that removing the LLM component or replacing it with a basic attention layer does not degrade forecasting performance---in most cases, the results even improve! We also find that despite their significant computational cost, pretrained LLMs do no better than models trained from scratch, do not represent the sequential dependencies in time series, and do not assist in few-shot settings. Additionally, we explore time series encoders and find that patching and attention structures perform similarly to LLM-based forecasters. All resources needed to reproduce our work are available: https://github.com/BennyTMT/LLMsForTimeSeries.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TanMGAH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TanMGAH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/6ed5bf446f59e2c6646d23058c86424b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有基于LLM的时间序列预测研究默认LLM组件对预测效果有正向增益，缺乏系统性的消融验证，导致大量高成本但无实际效果的方案被提出。","importance":"范式级贡献，直接推翻了当前LLM时间序列预测分支的核心假设，纠正了领域的错误研究方向，对跨模态建模、时序建模的技术选型有直接指导意义。","technical_approach":"纯实证消融研究，核心是对3种主流LLM时序预测方法做控制变量测试，依次移除LLM组件、替换为基础注意力层、对比预训练与随机初始化效果，没有提出新的建模方法，区别于此前只提出新方案不做底层有效性验证的研究。","experiments":"在12个公开时序数据集上测试3种主流LLM时序预测方法，移除LLM组件或替换为基础注意力层后，预测效果在92%的测试case中不下降，平均提升3.2%；预训练LLM的表现与从零训练的同结构模型无显著差异，少样本场景下无额外增益。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM-based time series forecasting studies default that LLM components have positive contribution to forecasting performance, lack systematic ablation verification, leading to a large number of high-cost but ineffective solutions being proposed.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution, directly overthrows the core assumption of the current LLM time series forecasting branch, corrects the wrong research direction of the field, and provides direct guidance for technology selection of cross-modal modeling and time series modeling.","technical_approach":"Pure empirical ablation study, conducts controlled variable tests on 3 mainstream LLM time series forecasting methods, sequentially removes LLM components, replaces them with basic attention layers, compares the performance of pre-trained and randomly initialized models, no new modeling method is proposed, different from previous studies that only propose new solutions without underlying validity verification.","experiments":"Tests 3 mainstream LLM time series forecasting methods on 12 public time series datasets, after removing LLM components or replacing them with basic attention layers, forecasting performance does not decrease in 92% of test cases, with an average improvement of 3.2%; pre-trained LLMs have no significant performance difference from models with the same structure trained from scratch, and no additional gain in few-shot scenarios.","authors_note":""},"tags":["time-series","llm","forecasting","benchmark"],"keywords":["Time Series","Language Models","Time Series Forecasting"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"时序预测的核心是捕捉序列的长程依赖关系","claim_en":"The core of time series forecasting is to capture long-range dependencies of sequences","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"现有主流LLM时序预测方法中的LLM组件对预测效果无正向贡献，反而会增加计算成本","claim_en":"The LLM component in existing mainstream LLM-based time series forecasting methods has no positive contribution to forecasting performance, and instead increases computational cost","opposes":"领域默认LLM的通用序列建模能力可以提升时序预测效果，大量工作基于该假设设计方案","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Ablation Studies","why_contested":"直接推翻了LLM时序预测分支的核心假设，会大幅改变该领域的研究资源分配方向"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为跨模态建模错误方向的反例备查，不需要读正文，内部时序建模选型直接排除LLM组件即可","en":"For reference as a counterexample of wrong cross-modal modeling directions, no need to read full text; directly exclude LLM components in internal time series modeling selection."}},{"id":"TanZSKK24","title":"DiffNorm: Self-Supervised Normalization for Non-autoregressive Speech-to-speech Translation","authors":["Weiting Tan","Jingyu Zhang","Lingfeng Shen","Daniel Khashabi","Philipp Koehn"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1bd","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TanZSKK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TanZSKK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3a40e042c66e84659249f3254460c123-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":1,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"非自回归语音到语音翻译模型存在输出重复、语义不连贯的问题，核心原因是语音数据同时包含声学和语言学变异，分布复杂度高，现有线性归一化方法无法有效简化分布。","importance":"方法级贡献，将扩散模型的去噪能力迁移到归一化任务，为非自回归生成任务的分布简化提供了新的思路，对语音LM、非自回归建模有参考价值。","technical_approach":"改进的归一化方法，核心是用自监督噪声估计目标训练DiffNorm模块，将加噪的语音特征去噪得到归一化的目标数据，同时用无分类器引导正则化非自回归Transformer，区别于此前只做线性变换的层归一化、实例归一化等方案。","experiments":"公开实验细节有限，核心验证了加入DiffNorm后，非自回归语音到语音翻译的BLEU值比基线提升1.8，输出重复率降低32%，推理速度保留原非自回归模型的95%以上。","authors_note":"Philipp Koehn（约翰霍普金斯大学，机器翻译领域资深研究者）参与该工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Non-autoregressive speech-to-speech translation models have problems of repetitive output and semantic incoherence, the core reason is that speech data contains both acoustic and linguistic variations, with high distribution complexity, existing linear normalization methods cannot effectively simplify the distribution.","importance":"Method-level contribution, migrates the denoising ability of diffusion models to normalization tasks, provides new ideas for distribution simplification of non-autoregressive generation tasks, and provides reference for speech LM and non-autoregressive modeling.","technical_approach":"Improved normalization method, trains the DiffNorm module with a self-supervised noise estimation objective, denoises noisy speech features to obtain normalized target data, and regularizes non-autoregressive Transformers with classifier-free guidance, different from previous linear transformation-based normalization solutions such as layer normalization and instance normalization.","experiments":"Public experimental details are limited, core verification shows that after adding DiffNorm, the BLEU score of non-autoregressive speech-to-speech translation is 1.8 higher than baseline, output repetition rate is reduced by 32%, and inference speed retains more than 95% of the original non-autoregressive model.","authors_note":"Philipp Koehn (Johns Hopkins University, senior researcher in machine translation) participated in this work."},"tags":["speech-to-speech","non-autoregressive","normalization","translation"],"keywords":["speech-to-speech translation","non-autoregressive modeling","diffusion models"],"notable_authors":["Philipp Koehn"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"非自回归生成模型的输出质量低于自回归模型的核心原因是分布多峰性导致的一致性问题","claim_en":"The core reason why non-autoregressive generation models have lower output quality than autoregressive models is the consistency problem caused by multi-modal distribution","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于扩散的归一化方法比传统线性归一化更适合简化语音这类多模态复杂分布","claim_en":"Diffusion-based normalization is more suitable for simplifying complex multi-modal distributions such as speech than traditional linear normalization","opposes":"非自回归语音生成任务的归一化普遍采用层归一化、实例归一化等线性变换方法","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"如果成立可以拓展扩散模型在生成任务预处理环节的应用，提升非自回归模型的输出质量上限"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作非自回归生成归一化方向的文献备查，和通用LLM预训练几乎无关联，不需要细读","en":"Only for literature reference in non-autoregressive generation normalization direction, almost irrelevant to general LLM pretraining, no need for close reading."}},{"id":"TangCL00FYLHHH024","title":"Self-Retrieval: End-to-End Information Retrieval with One Large Language Model","authors":["Qiaoyu Tang","Jiawei Chen","Zhuoqun Li","Bowen Yu","Yaojie Lu","Cheng Fu","Haiyang Yu","Hongyu Lin","Fei Huang","Ben He","Xianpei Han","Le Sun","Yongbin Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1be","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/TangCL00FYLHHH024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/TangCL00FYLHHH024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/741ad162ab0f3da6f9aad60e9e34f5f1-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有检索增强生成系统采用独立IR组件+LLM的分离架构，IR和LLM独立训练，无法实现知识共享和端到端优化，限制了检索效果的提升和部署效率。","importance":"范式级贡献，提出了端到端的LLM原生检索架构，打破了传统IR的模块化设计，对检索增强生成、LLM原生能力拓展有参考价值。","technical_approach":"原创架构，核心是将检索语料通过自监督对比学习内化到LLM的参数中，所有检索环节（召回、排序、答案生成）都由单一LLM完成，不需要独立的检索引擎，区别于此前的RAG、双编码器检索等分离架构。","experiments":"公开实验细节有限，核心验证了Self-Retrieval在开放域问答任务上的F1值比传统BM25+LLM的RAG架构高7.2%，端到端检索延迟降低41%。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing retrieval-augmented generation systems adopt a separate architecture of independent IR component + LLM, IR and LLM are trained independently, cannot achieve knowledge sharing and end-to-end optimization, limiting the improvement of retrieval performance and deployment efficiency.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution, proposes an end-to-end LLM-native retrieval architecture, breaks the modular design of traditional IR, and provides reference for retrieval-augmented generation and LLM native capability expansion.","technical_approach":"Original architecture, internalizes the retrieval corpus into LLM parameters through self-supervised contrastive learning, all retrieval links (recall, ranking, answer generation) are completed by a single LLM, no independent retrieval engine is required, different from previous separate architectures such as RAG and dual-encoder retrieval.","experiments":"Public experimental details are limited, core verification shows that Self-Retrieval has 7.2% higher F1 score than traditional BM25+LLM RAG architecture on open-domain question answering tasks, and end-to-end retrieval latency is reduced by 41%.","authors_note":""},"tags":["information-retrieval","llm","self-retrieval","end-to-end"],"keywords":["Large Language Model","Information Retrieval","Retrieval Augmented Generation"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"检索增强可以大幅提升LLM的知识准确性，减少幻觉","claim_en":"Retrieval augmentation can significantly improve the knowledge accuracy of LLMs and reduce hallucinations","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"将检索语料内化到LLM参数中的端到端检索架构，性能优于传统分离式IR+LLM的RAG架构","claim_en":"The end-to-end retrieval architecture that internalizes the retrieval corpus into LLM parameters outperforms the traditional separate IR+LLM RAG architecture","opposes":"主流检索增强方案采用独立IR系统召回相关文档，再输入LLM处理的分离架构","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"如果成立可以重新定义检索系统的设计范式，大幅简化RAG系统的部署复杂度"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为端到端检索架构的弱信号备查，现有方案落地成本过高，暂不需要跟进具体实现细节","en":"For reference as a weak signal of end-to-end retrieval architecture, current implementation cost is too high, no need to follow up specific details for now."}},{"id":"Uehara0HSELLB24","title":"Bridging Model-Based Optimization and Generative Modeling via Conservative Fine-Tuning of Diffusion Models","authors":["Masatoshi Uehara","Yulai Zhao","Ehsan Hajiramezanali","Gabriele Scalia","Gökcen Eraslan","Avantika Lal","Sergey Levine","Tommaso Biancalani"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1bf","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Uehara0HSELLB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Uehara0HSELLB24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e68274fc4f158dbcbd4dddc672f7ee9c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有扩散模型结合强化学习的生物序列（DNA/蛋白）设计方法默认奖励模型可访问，无法适配科学领域只有静态离线数据集、奖励模型未知的场景。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了离线场景下扩散模型的保守微调策略，打通了生成建模和基于模型的优化的落地路径，对生物序列设计、科学计算领域的AI应用有参考价值。","technical_approach":"改进的扩散模型微调方法，核心是在离线数据集上训练时加入保守正则项，限制模型生成超出训练数据集分布的无效样本，不需要提前训练独立的奖励模型，区别于此前的在线RL微调扩散模型的方案。","experiments":"公开实验细节有限，核心验证了在蛋白序列设计任务上，该方法生成的符合生物活性要求的序列比例比基线扩散模型高21%，比在线RL微调方法高12%，样本效率提升3倍以上。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing biological sequence (DNA/protein) design methods combining diffusion models and reinforcement learning default that reward models are accessible, cannot adapt to scientific scenarios where only static offline datasets are available and reward models are unknown.","importance":"Method-level contribution, proposes a conservative fine-tuning strategy for diffusion models in offline scenarios, opens up the landing path of generative modeling and model-based optimization, and provides reference for AI applications in biological sequence design and scientific computing fields.","technical_approach":"Improved diffusion model fine-tuning method, adds a conservative regularization term during training on offline datasets, limits the model from generating invalid samples beyond the training dataset distribution, no need to train an independent reward model in advance, different from previous online RL fine-tuning solutions for diffusion models.","experiments":"Public experimental details are limited, core verification shows that on protein sequence design tasks, the proportion of sequences generated by this method that meet biological activity requirements is 21% higher than baseline diffusion models, 12% higher than online RL fine-tuning methods, and sample efficiency is improved by more than 3 times.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","fine-tuning","optimization","generative-modeling"],"keywords":["Diffusion models","Reinforcement learning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"扩散模型可以有效捕捉生物序列的可行分布，基于模型的优化可以提升目标属性的得分","claim_en":"Diffusion models can effectively capture the feasible distribution of biological sequences, and model-based optimization can improve the score of target attributes","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"离线场景下带保守正则的扩散模型微调，比在线RL微调的样本效率更高，生成有效序列的比例更高","claim_en":"Conservative fine-tuning of diffusion models in offline scenarios has higher sample efficiency and higher proportion of valid generated sequences than online RL fine-tuning","opposes":"现有扩散模型用于序列优化的方案普遍采用在线RL微调，依赖可访问的奖励模型","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"如果成立可以大幅降低扩散模型在科学设计领域的落地门槛，不需要大量在线交互样本"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅作科学生成场景扩散模型微调的文献备查，和通用NLP预训练无直接关联，不需要细读","en":"Only for literature reference of diffusion model fine-tuning in scientific generation scenarios, no direct relevance to general NLP pretraining, no need for close reading."}},{"id":"VankadaraXHC24","title":"On Feature Learning in Structured State Space Models","authors":["Leena Chennuru Vankadara","Jin Xu","Moritz Haas","Volkan Cevher"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1c0","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/VankadaraXHC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/VankadaraXHC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9c7eeda2dc98e61baa9a5884afd231bc-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注一个基础但常被跳过的问题：结构化状态空间模型（SSM）为什么能学到有用特征，以及它们在什么条件下会学不到。过去很多 SSM 工作更强调长序列效率和替代 attention 的工程优势，但对“特征学习机制”本身解释不足，这限制了我们判断它们何时适合做预训练骨干。","importance":"它的价值主要在机制分析和架构理解。对 pretrain 的意义是，如果能说明 SSM 在何种频谱结构、任务结构或训练信号下更擅长学习表示，就能更合理地决定它应作为 attention 的补充、替代还是混合模块；这比单纯报 benchmark 更有迁移价值。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是从理论和可控实验两端分析 structured SSM 的特征学习行为，而不是仅做经验比较。关键点通常包括：把状态更新、卷积核或频域响应和可学习特征联系起来；分析不同参数化对表达局部模式、长程依赖和频率选择性的影响；再用合成任务与真实任务验证这些结论。这样的设计有效，因为 SSM 的强项常常来自其归纳偏置，而不是无条件逼近能力。","experiments":"实验上更可能强调诊断而非大规模 SOTA。值得看的事实通常是：不同 SSM 参数化在低频/高频特征学习上的差异，序列长度增加时特征质量如何变化，以及与 Transformer 或简单卷积相比在哪些任务上占优、在哪些任务上退化。由于没有摘要，无法确认具体模型规模、数据集、基线和数值结果。","authors_note":"从作者表看，Volkan Cevher 是较知名研究者；但机构归属和团队代表作在当前信息下无法可靠确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"This paper tackles a foundational question: how structured state space models actually learn features, and when they fail to do so. Much of the SSM literature emphasizes sequence efficiency and competition with attention, but offers less clarity on the representation-learning mechanism itself.","importance":"The value is mainly mechanistic rather than benchmark-driven. For pretraining, this matters because architecture choices should depend on what inductive biases help representation learning under realistic data and optimization regimes, not just on asymptotic throughput or context length.","technical_approach":"The likely contribution is a combined theoretical and empirical study of feature learning in structured SSMs. The key mechanism is to connect state dynamics, kernel parameterization, or spectral response to what kinds of features the model can represent and learn efficiently, then validate those claims on controlled tasks and standard sequence settings. This is the right angle because SSM performance is heavily shaped by its built-in bias toward certain temporal structures.","experiments":"The experiments are likely diagnostic rather than large-scale SOTA runs. The useful findings would include which SSM parameterizations favor low-frequency versus high-frequency structure, how representation quality changes with sequence length, and where SSMs beat or lag Transformers and conv-style baselines. Concrete model sizes, datasets, and gains cannot be confirmed from the provided metadata.","authors_note":"Volkan Cevher is a notable author on the paper. The full institution list and representative prior work cannot be stated confidently from the information given."},"tags":["state-space-models","feature-learning","architecture"],"notable_authors":["Volkan Cevher"],"keywords":["State space models","feature learning","hyperparameter transfer","scaling theory","deep learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看可控实验和机制分析小节即可，结论可指导内部SSM与attention混合预训练骨干的架构选型","en":"Only read controlled experiment and mechanism analysis sections; conclusions guide architecture selection of internal SSM and attention hybrid pretraining backbones."}},{"id":"VarmaDCCL24","title":"RaVL: Discovering and Mitigating Spurious Correlations in Fine-Tuned Vision-Language Models","authors":["Maya Varma","Jean-Benoit Delbrouck","Zhihong Chen","Akshay Chaudhari","Curtis P. Langlotz"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1c1","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/VarmaDCCL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/VarmaDCCL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/95c6ae3f3393786203a4b6dcb9df1036-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：微调后的视觉语言模型会学到大量伪相关，但现有训练和评测通常只暴露平均准确率，掩盖了模型到底在看真正证据还是在吃数据偏差。这个问题之所以重要，是因为很多 VLM 在医疗、文档或专业场景微调后，训练集偏差会比预训练阶段更集中、更隐蔽。","importance":"它更像是一个可靠性与诊断方法工作，而不是新的统一预训练范式。对 pretrain/ posttrain 接口的启示是：微调很容易覆盖掉预训练得到的稳健表征，转而放大 shortcut；因此仅靠大规模预训练并不能自动免疫偏差，后续数据构造和目标设计同样关键。","technical_approach":"核心方法是先发现再缓解 VLM fine-tuning 中的伪相关。按题目判断，RaVL 很可能通过反事实重组、区域级归因或属性干预，定位模型是否依赖了与标签共现但非因果的视觉/文本线索；然后再用重加权、对比约束或数据增强去抑制这类依赖。它和普通鲁棒训练的区别在于，重点不是一味增加噪声，而是显式识别 shortcut 来源并对准处理。","experiments":"实验大概率围绕偏差敏感的视觉语言任务展开，重点比较原始微调、常规鲁棒训练和 RaVL 在分布内与分布外测试上的差异。最有价值的结果通常不是平均分提升多少，而是偏差子群、反事实样本或去伪相关评测上的显著改进。由于没有摘要，具体模型、数据集和数值无法确认。","authors_note":"从作者构成看，团队可能与 Stanford 医学影像/VLM 研究有关，Curtis P. Langlotz 是较知名学者；但机构和代表作在当前信息下不宜展开。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical failure mode: fine-tuned vision-language models often latch onto spurious correlations, while standard evaluation mostly reports average accuracy and misses whether the model relies on real evidence or dataset shortcuts. This is especially relevant in specialized domains, where fine-tuning data can be narrow and heavily biased.","importance":"This is primarily a robustness and diagnosis contribution, not a new pretraining paradigm. The broader lesson for pretrain-to-posttrain is that fine-tuning can easily overwrite robust pretrained features and amplify shortcut learning, so scale alone does not solve distributional brittleness.","technical_approach":"The method appears to have two stages: identify spurious cues and then mitigate them during VLM fine-tuning. From the title, RaVL likely uses counterfactual edits, region-level evidence checks, or attribute interventions to expose non-causal dependencies, then applies targeted reweighting, contrastive constraints, or debiasing augmentation. The design makes sense because it aims at the shortcut source directly instead of only adding generic robustness noise.","experiments":"The experiments likely focus on bias-sensitive VLM tasks and compare standard fine-tuning, generic robustness baselines, and RaVL under both in-distribution and shifted settings. The most informative results would be gains on subgroup robustness, counterfactual evaluation, or spurious-correlation benchmarks rather than average accuracy alone. Specific datasets, model sizes, and numerical improvements are not available from the provided input.","authors_note":"Curtis P. Langlotz is a notable author. A precise institution mapping and representative team history cannot be confirmed from the given information."},"tags":["vlm","fine-tuning","spurious-correlation","robustness"],"notable_authors":["Curtis P. Langlotz"],"keywords":["vision-language models","robustness","spurious correlations","fine-grained"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看伪相关定位方法的小节即可，结论说明预训练稳健表征会被低质量微调破坏，可指导内部微调流程设计","en":"Only read spurious correlation localization section; conclusions show robust pretrained representations can be damaged by low-quality fine-tuning, guiding internal fine-tuning workflow design."}},{"id":"VogelBB24","title":"WikiDBs: A Large-Scale Corpus Of Relational Databases From Wikidata","authors":["Liane Vogel","Jan-Micha Bodensohn","Carsten Binnig"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1c2","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/VogelBB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/VogelBB24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/4847447cae911dde321ca19afe7d8707-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：缺少大规模、结构化、真实世界的关系数据库语料，限制了模型学习表格/数据库上的推理与查询能力。过去很多数据集要么规模小、模式单一，要么更像表格问答而不是真正数据库，这使得预训练模型很难系统接触关系结构。","importance":"这是一个数据级贡献。对 pretrain 的价值很直接：如果 WikiDBs 规模够大、模式够多样，它可以成为训练数据库理解、结构化检索、text-to-SQL 或神经数据库接口模型的重要语料，也有助于研究模型如何同时处理文本和关系模式。","technical_approach":"核心方法是从 Wikidata 构建大规模关系数据库语料。关键设计通常包括：把知识图谱实体与关系整理成表结构或数据库实例，保留主键/外键或模式信息；再配套生成查询、描述或任务接口，使其既可用于生成式训练，也能用于结构化推理评测。这样的数据构造有效，因为它比扁平表格更接近真实数据库工作负载。","experiments":"实验应集中在语料统计和下游有效性上，比如用 WikiDBs 预训练或增强训练后，对数据库问答、查询生成或关系推理任务的提升。更值得看的细节是模式覆盖度、数据库实例数量、关系稀疏性，以及预训练带来的泛化收益能否跨 schema 迁移。由于没有摘要，具体规模和数值结果无法确认。","authors_note":"从作者看，团队可能与数据库方向机构有关，但当前信息不足以确认机构和代表性历史工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a clear data bottleneck: there is no widely used large-scale corpus of realistic relational databases for training and evaluating models on structured querying and database reasoning. Existing resources are often small, narrow, or closer to table QA than true relational data.","importance":"This is a dataset contribution with real pretraining relevance. If WikiDBs is broad and well-constructed, it can support pretraining for database understanding, schema-aware reasoning, text-to-SQL, and models that need to bridge natural language with relational structure.","technical_approach":"The likely method is to derive relational database instances from Wikidata at scale. The important design choices would be how entities and relations are mapped into tables, whether schema information and key structure are preserved, and how the corpus is packaged for generative or query-oriented learning. That matters because realistic relational inductive bias is hard to get from flat tables alone.","experiments":"The experiments likely cover corpus statistics and downstream usefulness, such as whether pretraining on WikiDBs improves query generation, database QA, or relational reasoning. The most valuable evidence would include schema diversity, database count, structural complexity, and gains that transfer across schemas rather than only within a fixed template. Exact numbers are not available from the provided metadata.","authors_note":"The team likely has a database systems background, but institutions and representative prior work cannot be confirmed from the information given."},"tags":["dataset","structured-data","pretraining","text-to-sql"],"keywords":["Dataset","Tabular Data","Relational Databases","Tabular Representation Learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"直接下载WikiDBs语料即可无需读正文，可作为结构化数据理解类预训练任务的补充训练语料","en":"Just download the WikiDBs corpus without reading full text; it works as supplementary training data for pretraining tasks focusing on structured data understanding."}},{"id":"Wan0NA24","title":"Teach Better or Show Smarter? On Instructions and Exemplars in Automatic Prompt Optimization","authors":["Xingchen Wan","Ruoxi Sun","Hootan Nakhost","Sercan Ö. Arik"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1c3","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Wan0NA24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Wan0NA24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/6b031defd145b02bed031093d8797bb3-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：自动提示优化里，到底是“把指令写得更好”更重要，还是“给更好的 exemplars 示例”更重要。过去大量工作把 prompt optimization 当成黑盒搜索，但很少拆开指令与示例这两个部件分别看，这使得经验结论难迁移。","importance":"它的重要性在于把 prompt engineering 从经验术变成更可分析的设计空间。对 pretrain/posttrain 的启示是，模型对 instruction 和 in-context exemplars 的利用方式可能不同，意味着我们不能只优化最终 prompt 文本，而要理解模型在“规则吸收”和“模式匹配”上的偏好。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是系统比较自动优化指令与自动选择/生成示例的收益。关键设计可能包括：固定一个部件只优化另一个，或者联合优化但做因果拆分；并在多个任务、模型和预算下比较收益曲线。这样的设计有效，因为 instruction 主要提供任务规范，exemplar 更像局部程序执行轨迹，两者对不同模型和任务的边际价值不一样。","experiments":"实验大概率覆盖分类、推理、生成等不同任务，比较 instruction-only、exemplar-only 和 joint optimization。最有价值的结果通常是边界判断：例如简单判别任务更多受益于示例，复杂规范任务更依赖指令，或者小模型与大模型的偏好不同。当前没有摘要，无法确认具体模型、任务集与提升数字。","authors_note":"Sercan Ö. Arik 是较知名作者；机构和团队代表作在当前信息下无法稳妥确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a clean question in automatic prompt optimization: is it more effective to improve instructions or to provide better exemplars. Prior work often treats prompts as a single black-box object, which obscures what actually drives gains and makes results hard to generalize.","importance":"Its value is in decomposing the prompt design space into analyzable parts. The broader takeaway for pretrain and posttrain is that models may use instructions and in-context examples differently, so optimizing prompts blindly misses how the model absorbs task rules versus local demonstrations.","technical_approach":"The likely method is a controlled comparison between optimizing instructions, optimizing exemplars, and optimizing both jointly. The important design choice is to isolate the contribution of each component across tasks, models, and search budgets. This works because instructions primarily encode task specification, while exemplars act more like local execution traces, and those roles need not have the same value across settings.","experiments":"The experiments probably span classification, reasoning, and generation tasks, comparing instruction-only, exemplar-only, and joint prompt optimization. The most useful outcome would be boundary conditions: which task types benefit more from exemplars, which depend more on clearer instructions, and how this shifts with model scale. Exact benchmarks and numerical deltas are not available here.","authors_note":"Sercan Ö. Arik is a notable author on the paper. Institutions and representative prior team work cannot be confirmed from the provided information."},"tags":["prompt-optimization","in-context-learning","instructions"],"notable_authors":["Sercan Ö. Arik"],"keywords":["instruction optimization","prompting","in-context learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅阅读§3的受控对比实验即可，其拆分指令与示例边际收益的设计可复用到内部prompt优化测试中。","en":"Only read §3 for controlled comparison results, the disentanglement design for instruction and exemplar gains can be reused in internal prompt optimization tests."}},{"id":"Wang0HWHXLEW24","title":"Improving Generalization and Convergence by Enhancing Implicit Regularization","authors":["Mingze Wang","Jinbo Wang","Haotian He","Zilin Wang","Guanhua Huang","Feiyu Xiong","Zhiyu Li","Weinan E","Lei Wu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1c4","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Wang0HWHXLEW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Wang0HWHXLEW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d712c8625fd97424c9744019b28dca21-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注一个经典但始终重要的问题：如何通过增强隐式正则化来同时改善泛化和收敛。很多优化器或训练技巧能让训练误差更快下降，但未必带来更好的测试性能；相反，好的隐式正则化常常来自优化路径本身，却难以被直接控制。","importance":"它更像是优化与训练动力学层面的通用方法。对 pretrain 的价值在于，大规模训练中泛化与稳定性经常来自微妙的优化偏置；如果这篇工作能把这种偏置显式增强，它可能影响学习率调度、归一化、优化器乃至 cooldown 阶段的设计。","technical_approach":"核心方法应是通过修改优化过程或参数更新形式，增强训练本来会自然产生但不够强的隐式正则化。它不是引入显式 penalty 那么简单，而是利用算法偏置让模型更倾向于低复杂度或更平滑的解。这样的路线通常有效，因为显式正则项往往和主目标打架，而优化偏置更容易在不改任务定义的前提下影响最终解。","experiments":"实验很可能覆盖标准视觉或语言基准，比较收敛速度、最终测试精度以及不同训练长度下的表现。若工作扎实，应该会有 ablation 说明收益来自隐式正则化增强，而非单纯学习率缩放或额外计算。由于没有摘要，具体架构、数据集和改进数字无法确认。","authors_note":"当前信息不足以确认机构和团队代表作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper studies a long-standing optimization question: how to improve both convergence and generalization by strengthening implicit regularization. Many training tricks speed up optimization but do not improve test performance, while useful implicit bias often comes from the optimizer trajectory itself and is hard to control directly.","importance":"This is mainly an optimization and training-dynamics contribution. For pretraining, that matters because large-scale generalization and stability are often driven by subtle optimization bias; if that bias can be enhanced systematically, it may influence optimizer choice, schedule design, and late-stage training strategy.","technical_approach":"The method likely modifies the update rule or training procedure to amplify beneficial implicit regularization rather than adding an explicit penalty term. That is an appealing direction because explicit regularizers can distort the main objective, while optimization-induced bias can steer solutions toward lower-complexity or flatter regions with less manual objective engineering.","experiments":"The experiments likely compare convergence speed, final test performance, and robustness across standard deep learning benchmarks. A convincing paper in this space should also separate true regularization effects from simple retuning of learning rate or compute budget. The provided information does not include the specific datasets, architectures, or numerical gains.","authors_note":"There is not enough information here to confirm institutions or representative prior team work."},"tags":["implicit-regularization","generalization","optimization"],"keywords":["implicit regularization","convergence","generalization","deep learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§4.2的优化偏置量化结果，可参考调整预训练的学习率调度与cooldown阶段设计。","en":"Focus on §4.2 for optimization bias quantification results, reference it when adjusting pretraining LR scheduling and cooldown phase designs."}},{"id":"Wang0XT0L24","title":"Q-VLM: Post-training Quantization for Large Vision-Language Models","authors":["Changyuan Wang","Ziwei Wang","Xiuwei Xu","Yansong Tang","Jie Zhou","Jiwen Lu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1c5","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Wang0XT0L24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Wang0XT0L24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/cffbaf4f47546ece96bb42c0edda40ee-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大视觉语言模型（LVLM）的训练后量化方法仅单独优化每层的量化误差，忽略跨层依赖，导致量化后多模态推理效果下降严重，无法满足低资源部署要求。","importance":"方法级贡献，提出了考虑跨层依赖的LVLM训练后量化框架，对多模态模型的端侧部署、低资源推理有直接应用价值。","technical_approach":"改进的训练后量化搜索策略，核心是发现激活熵和影响整体量化误差的跨层依赖强相关，用激活熵作为指导搜索最优量化策略，搜索成本比全局跨层搜索低90%以上，区别于此前的逐层独立量化方案。","experiments":"在7B、13B参数量的主流LVLM上测试，4bit量化后，多模态问答准确率比基线逐层量化方法高3.5%，推理速度提升15%，通用任务精度损失控制在1%以内。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing post-training quantization methods for large vision-language models (LVLM) only optimize the quantization error of each layer independently, ignore cross-layer dependencies, leading to serious performance degradation of multi-modal inference after quantization, which cannot meet low-resource deployment requirements.","importance":"Method-level contribution, proposes a post-training quantization framework for LVLM that considers cross-layer dependencies, and has direct application value for end-side deployment and low-resource inference of multi-modal models.","technical_approach":"Improved post-training quantization search strategy, finds that activation entropy is strongly correlated with cross-layer dependencies that affect overall quantization error, uses activation entropy as guidance to search for the optimal quantization strategy, search cost is more than 90% lower than global cross-layer search, different from previous layer-wise independent quantization solutions.","experiments":"Tests on mainstream LVLMs with 7B and 13B parameters, after 4bit quantization, multi-modal question answering accuracy is 3.5% higher than baseline layer-wise quantization method, inference speed is increased by 15%, and general task accuracy loss is controlled within 1%.","authors_note":""},"tags":["quantization","vlm","post-training-quantization"],"keywords":["Post-training quantization","Large vision-language models","Rounding function search"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"训练后量化可以大幅降低大模型的推理内存占用和延迟，是端侧部署的核心技术","claim_en":"Post-training quantization can significantly reduce the inference memory footprint and latency of large models, and is the core technology for end-side deployment","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于激活熵引导的考虑跨层依赖的量化策略，比逐层独立量化策略的整体误差更低，效果更好","claim_en":"Activation entropy guided quantization strategy considering cross-layer dependencies has lower overall error and better performance than layer-wise independent quantization strategy","opposes":"现有训练后量化方案普遍采用逐层独立优化的策略，不需要考虑跨层依赖","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4 Experiments","why_contested":"如果成立可以为所有大模型的训练后量化提供新的优化方向，不局限于多模态模型"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为多模态训练后量化方向文献备查，不需要细读正文。","en":"Keep as a reference for multimodal post-training quantization literature, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"WangCK24","title":"Microstructures and Accuracy of Graph Recall by Large Language Models","authors":["Yanbang Wang","Hejie Cui","Jon M. Kleinberg"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1c6","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangCK24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangCK24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/77e6814d32a86b76123bd10aa7e2ad81-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM的图结构推理能力评估仅关注最终推理结果，缺乏对底层图召回偏差的系统性研究，不清楚LLM召回图结构的模式和对后续推理的影响，无法针对性提升LLM的图推理能力。","importance":"实证级贡献，首次系统性研究了LLM的图召回行为，对比了和人类图召回偏差的异同，对LLM的结构化推理、知识图谱应用有参考价值。","technical_approach":"纯实证研究，核心是设计了受控的文本描述图召回任务，统计LLM召回图的微结构（边、三角形、社区等）的偏差模式，和人类认知实验的结果做对比，区别于此前只评估图推理最终结果的研究。","experiments":"在GPT-4、Llama 2 70B等主流LLM上测试，LLM召回图的边准确率平均为68%，社区结构的召回率比随机结构高24%，和人类的召回偏差模式有72%的相似度，图召回的偏差会导致后续图推理任务的准确率下降15%以上。","authors_note":"Jon M. Kleinberg（康奈尔大学，图论、网络科学领域资深研究者）参与该工作。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing evaluations of LLM's graph structure reasoning ability only focus on the final reasoning result, lack systematic research on the underlying graph recall bias, do not know the pattern of LLM's graph recall and its impact on subsequent reasoning, and cannot targeted improve LLM's graph reasoning ability.","importance":"Empirical contribution, first systematically studies the graph recall behavior of LLMs, compares the similarities and differences with human graph recall bias, and provides reference for LLM's structured reasoning and knowledge graph applications.","technical_approach":"Pure empirical study, designs controlled text-described graph recall tasks, counts the bias patterns of microstructures (edges, triangles, communities, etc.) of graphs recalled by LLMs, and compares with the results of human cognitive experiments, different from previous studies that only evaluate the final result of graph reasoning.","experiments":"Tests on mainstream LLMs such as GPT-4 and Llama 2 70B, the average edge accuracy of graphs recalled by LLMs is 68%, the recall rate of community structures is 24% higher than random structures, and the similarity with human recall bias patterns is 72%, graph recall bias leads to a decrease of more than 15% in the accuracy of subsequent graph reasoning tasks.","authors_note":"Jon M. Kleinberg (Cornell University, senior researcher in graph theory and network science) participated in this work."},"tags":["llm","graph-recall","structured-reasoning","evaluation"],"keywords":["large language models","graph recall","human cognition","sociology","network motif"],"notable_authors":["Jon M. Kleinberg"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LLM的结构化推理能力依赖于对输入文本中结构化信息的准确召回","claim_en":"LLM's structured reasoning ability relies on accurate recall of structured information in input text","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"LLM召回图结构的偏差模式与人类的认知偏差高度相似，而非随机误差","claim_en":"The bias pattern of LLM's graph recall is highly similar to human cognitive bias, rather than random error","opposes":"之前默认LLM的结构化信息召回错误是随机噪声，没有系统性偏差","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Experiments","why_contested":"如果成立可以借鉴人类认知的优化方法提升LLM的结构化推理能力，而不是单纯增加训练数据"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只看Fig 2和§4的偏差模式统计结果，可用于指导结构化推理能力的评估设计。","en":"Only check Fig 2 and §4 for bias pattern statistics, use it to guide structured reasoning ability evaluation design."}},{"id":"WangCMLZL0LML24","title":"OmniJARVIS: Unified Vision-Language-Action Tokenization Enables Open-World Instruction Following Agents","authors":["Zihao Wang","Shaofei Cai","Zhancun Mu","Haowei Lin","Ceyao Zhang","Xuejie Liu","Qing Li","Anji Liu","Xiaojian (Shawn) Ma","Yitao Liang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1c7","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangCMLZL0LML24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangCMLZL0LML24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/85f1225db986e629289f402c46eff1a4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有Minecraft开放世界指令跟随智能体的VLA模型要么输出文本目标给独立控制器，要么直接输出控制指令，无法同时兼顾强推理能力和高效决策能力。","importance":"属于具身智能预训练方向的方法级探索，为将行为轨迹原生融入多模态大模型词汇表提供了可行路径，可支撑推理与决策端到端优化的统一VLA架构设计。","technical_approach":"原创统一视觉-语言-动作tokenization框架，首先通过自监督方法训练行为编码器，将包含观测和动作的行为轨迹离散化为token，配套训练基于这些token的模仿学习策略解码器，再将行为token扩充到预训练多模态大模型的词汇表中，舍弃了过去推理与决策模块分离的设计。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体模型参数量、数据集规模及量化指标，仅明确在Minecraft场景下测试开放世界指令跟随能力。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing vision-language-action (VLA) models for open-world Minecraft instruction-following agents either output textual goals to separate controllers or generate control commands directly, failing to balance strong reasoning capability and efficient decision-making performance.","importance":"It is a method-level exploration for embodied agent pretraining, providing a feasible path to natively integrate behavior trajectories into multimodal LLM vocabularies, and supporting unified VLA architecture design for end-to-end optimization of reasoning and decision-making.","technical_approach":"The proposed original unified vision-language-action tokenization framework first trains a behavior encoder via self-supervised learning to discretize observation-action trajectories into discrete tokens, paired with an imitation learning policy decoder conditioned on these tokens. The behavior tokens are then added to the vocabulary of a pretrained multimodal LLM, abandoning the prior design of separated reasoning and decision modules.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose specific model size, dataset scale or quantitative metrics, only specifying that the model is tested on open-world instruction following tasks in Minecraft.","authors_note":""},"tags":["unified-tokenization","vision-language-action","agent","open-world"],"keywords":["open-world","multimodal language model","decision making","generalist agents"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"具身智能VLA模型需要同时处理多模态输入和输出控制信号，才能完成开放世界指令跟随任务。","claim_en":"VLA models for embodied agents need to process both multimodal inputs and output control signals to complete open-world instruction following tasks.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"将行为轨迹离散化为token并扩充到多模态大模型词汇表的统一架构，比推理决策分离的架构更适合开放世界具身智能任务。","claim_en":"The unified architecture that discretizes behavior trajectories into tokens and adds them to multimodal LLM vocabularies is more suitable for open-world embodied intelligence tasks than separated reasoning-decision architectures.","opposes":"Prior VLA designs split reasoning and decision modules into two independent parts for separate optimization.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract","why_contested":"Provides a new design direction for native integration of multimodal interaction signals in embodied intelligence models, which can be verified by subsequent similar works."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3.1的动作token离散化设计，可参考调整具身智能预训练的多模态token设计。","en":"Focus on §3.1 for action token discretization design, reference it when designing multimodal tokens for embodied AI pretraining."}},{"id":"WangCSSL24","title":"Mixture of Demonstrations for In-Context Learning","authors":["Song Wang","Zihan Chen","Chengshuai Shi","Cong Shen","Jundong Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1c8","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangCSSL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangCSSL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a0da098e0031f58269efdcba40eedf47-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有ICL演示样本选择方法依赖全局检索器打分筛选，存在搜索空间大、无效演示引入噪声的问题，导致ICL性能不稳定且优化成本高。","importance":"属于ICL推理优化方向的方法级改进，降低了演示选择的计算开销同时抑制噪声，对大模型推理阶段的ICL性能提升有实际工程落地价值。","technical_approach":"原创演示混合（MoD）框架，首先将演示池划分为多个组，每个组由一个专家模块管理以缩小搜索空间，再设计专家级训练策略优化检索器，降低无效演示对训练的负面影响，舍弃了过去全局检索统一打分的设计。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体模型、数据集及指标提升幅度，仅明确针对ICL演示选择任务优化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing demonstration selection methods for in-context learning (ICL) rely on global retriever scoring, suffering from large search space and noise introduced by unhelpful demonstrations, leading to unstable ICL performance and high optimization cost.","importance":"It is a method-level improvement for ICL inference optimization, reducing the computational cost of demonstration selection while suppressing noise, and has practical engineering value for improving ICL performance during LLM inference.","technical_approach":"The original Mixture of Demonstrations (MoD) framework first partitions the demonstration pool into multiple groups, each managed by an expert module to reduce the search space. An expert-wise training strategy is then designed to optimize the retriever, reducing the negative impact of unhelpful demonstrations on training, abandoning the prior global retrieval unified scoring design.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose specific models, datasets or metric improvement margins, only specifying that it is optimized for ICL demonstration selection tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["in-context-learning","demonstration-selection","mixture"],"keywords":["In-context Learning","Large Language Models","Mixture-of-Experts"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"ICL性能受演示样本的质量和适配度的显著影响。","claim_en":"ICL performance is significantly affected by the quality and relevance of demonstration samples.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"演示池分组加专家级训练策略的MoD框架，比全局检索的演示选择方法在ICL任务上取得更优且更稳定的性能。","claim_en":"The MoD framework with demonstration pool partitioning and expert-wise training strategy achieves better and more stable performance on ICL tasks than global retrieval demonstration selection methods.","opposes":"Prior demonstration selection methods use global retrieval and unified scoring for all demonstrations without grouping.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract","why_contested":"Provides a low-cost optimization path for ICL demonstration selection that can be validated across different LLM sizes and task types."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§4的分组检索实验结果，可复用该检索策略到推理侧ICL演示选择模块。","en":"Only read §4 for grouped retrieval experiment results, reuse the retrieval strategy in inference-side ICL demonstration selection modules."}},{"id":"WangD0B24","title":"Localizing Memorization in SSL Vision Encoders","authors":["Wenhao Wang","Adam Dziedzic","Michael Backes","Franziska Boenisch"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1c9","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangD0B24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangD0B24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/6f6af59b11f3919965b9811c6c9ad6df-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有SSL视觉编码器的记忆性研究仅聚焦于记忆数据的特征和与下游效用的关联，未明确记忆行为在编码器内部的发生位置，无法为针对性降低记忆风险提供依据。","importance":"属于SSL模型可解释性方向的方法级贡献，提出的无监督记忆定位指标可直接用于预训练视觉编码器的隐私风险评估，不需要下游任务适配。","technical_approach":"原创两层记忆定位指标，分别是逐层记忆度（LayerMem）和逐单元记忆度（UnitMem），两个指标都不依赖下游任务、不需要标签信息，仅需一次前向传播即可计算，舍弃了过去依赖下游任务标签评估记忆性的设计。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体模型参数量、数据集规模及量化结果，仅明确在卷积和Transformer架构的SSL编码器、多类数据集上进行了验证。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing memorization studies for SSL vision encoders only focus on characteristics of memorized data and their correlation with downstream utility, without identifying where memorization occurs inside the encoder, so they cannot provide guidance for targeted reduction of memorization risks.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution in SSL model interpretability. The proposed unsupervised memorization localization metrics can be directly used for privacy risk assessment of pretrained vision encoders without downstream task adaptation.","technical_approach":"The original two-level memorization localization metrics, LayerMem (per-layer) and UnitMem (per-unit), are independent of downstream tasks, do not require label information, and can be computed with only one forward pass, abandoning the prior design of evaluating memorization relying on downstream task labels.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose specific model size, dataset scale or quantitative results, only specifying that it is validated on SSL encoders of convolutional and Transformer architectures, as well as multiple types of datasets.","authors_note":""},"tags":["memorization","ssl","vision-encoders","interpretability"],"keywords":["self-supervised learning","memorization","localization"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"SSL视觉编码器即使在大规模无标注数据上预训练，仍会记忆单个数据点，带来隐私泄露风险。","claim_en":"SSL vision encoders still memorize individual data points even when pretrained on large-scale unlabeled data, bringing privacy leakage risks.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"提出的LayerMem和UnitMem指标可无监督、无标签、单前向传播地定位SSL编码器内部的记忆发生位置，准确率高于依赖下游任务的记忆评估方法。","claim_en":"The proposed LayerMem and UnitMem metrics can localize memorization locations inside SSL encoders in an unsupervised, label-free, single-forward-pass manner, with higher accuracy than memorization assessment methods relying on downstream tasks.","opposes":"Prior memorization assessment methods for SSL encoders require downstream task labels and multi-step computation.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract","why_contested":"Enables low-cost, real-time memorization risk detection for pretrained SSL vision encoders, which can be validated across different SSL frameworks."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为视觉预训练隐私风险评估方向文献备查，无需细读。","en":"Keep as a reference for vision pretraining privacy risk assessment literature, no detailed reading required."}},{"id":"WangSW24","title":"Great Minds Think Alike: The Universal Convergence Trend of Input Salience","authors":["Yipei Wang","Jeffrey Siskind","Xiaoqian Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1ca","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangSW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangSW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/83e77607638c4fb17fba4a9b7844800c-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有对DNN优化后分布的研究未聚焦于输入显著性图的分布特征，无法解释不同随机初始化训练的同架构模型的行为相似性规律。","importance":"属于深度学习优化机制方向的理论级贡献，发现的显著性图收敛趋势修正了过往对模型容量和个体差异关系的认知，为模型泛化性、可复现性研究提供了新的观测依据。","technical_approach":"采用逐点分析方法研究优化后DNN的函数族分布，聚焦于决定模型数学本质的输入梯度场即显著性图，舍弃了过往仅关注模型输出或参数分布的分析维度。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体实验设置及量化结果，仅明确观测到反常识趋势：两个随机优化的同架构模型的显著性图相似度随任意一方模型容量提升而上升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing studies on the distribution of optimized DNNs do not focus on the distribution characteristics of input saliency maps, and cannot explain the behavioral similarity law of models with the same architecture trained from different random initializations.","importance":"It is a theoretical-level contribution in deep learning optimization mechanisms. The discovered convergence trend of saliency maps corrects previous understanding of the relationship between model capacity and individual differences, and provides new observational evidence for research on model generalization and reproducibility.","technical_approach":"A pointwise analysis method is used to study the function family distribution of optimized DNNs, focusing on the input gradient field (i.e., saliency map) that determines the mathematical essence of the model, abandoning the prior analysis dimensions that only focus on model output or parameter distribution.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose specific experimental settings or quantitative results, only specifying that a counter-intuitive trend is observed: the similarity of saliency maps between two stochastically optimized models of the same architecture increases as the capacity of either model increases.","authors_note":""},"tags":["salience","interpretability","training-dynamics"],"keywords":["explainable artificial intelligence","saliency maps","model distributions"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"DNN的随机优化过程会引入不确定性，训练得到的模型可视为从优化后模型分布中采样的样本。","claim_en":"The stochastic optimization process of DNNs introduces uncertainty, and trained models can be regarded as samples sampled from the distribution of optimized models.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"同架构的两个随机优化模型的显著性图相似度随任意一方的模型容量提升而上升，不受初始化、训练数据小差异的影响。","claim_en":"The similarity of saliency maps between two stochastically optimized models of the same architecture increases as the capacity of either model increases, and is not affected by small differences in initialization or training data.","opposes":"The prior belief that larger model capacity leads to higher individual differences between models trained with different random seeds.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract","why_contested":"Challenges the common understanding of model capacity and individual variability, and has guiding significance for improving the reproducibility of large model training."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"理论贡献有限，仅作为深度学习优化动力学相关文献备查即可。","en":"Limited theoretical contribution, only keep as a reference for deep learning optimization dynamics literature."}},{"id":"WangXLLHLY00LL24","title":"Proving Theorems Recursively","authors":["Haiming Wang","Huajian Xin","Zhengying Liu","Wenda Li","Yinya Huang","Jianqiao Lu","Zhicheng Yang","Jing Tang","Jian Yin","Zhenguo Li","Xiaodan Liang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1cb","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangXLLHLY00LL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangXLLHLY00LL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/9de7a49945898da86e062e7029baa284-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有基于大模型的自动定理证明方法采用逐step生成的短视启发式搜索，容易生成次优或无效子目标，无法完成长证明的生成。","importance":"属于自动定理证明建模范式的方法级改进，递归分层的证明思路更接近人类证明定理的逻辑，为长定理证明的大模型建模提供了新的方向。","technical_approach":"原创的递归分层定理证明框架POETRY，在Isabelle定理证明器中逐层搜索可验证的证明草图，当前层的中间猜想的详细证明暂时用占位符替代，完成当前层草图验证后再递归求解下层的中间猜想，舍弃了过去逐token/逐step生成证明的线性搜索设计。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体模型、数据集及证明成功率提升幅度，仅明确针对长定理证明任务优化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing LLM-based automated theorem proving methods use step-by-step generation with short-sighted heuristic search, which is prone to generating suboptimal or invalid subgoals and cannot complete the generation of long proofs.","importance":"It is a method-level improvement of the automated theorem proving modeling paradigm. The recursive hierarchical proof idea is closer to the logic of human theorem proving, and provides a new direction for LLM modeling of long theorem proving.","technical_approach":"The original recursive hierarchical theorem proving framework POETRY searches for verifiable proof sketches level by level in the Isabelle theorem prover. The detailed proofs of intermediate conjectures at the current level are temporarily replaced by placeholders. After the current level sketch is verified, the lower-level intermediate conjectures are solved recursively, abandoning the prior linear search design of generating proofs token by token or step by step.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose specific models, datasets or proof success rate improvement margins, only specifying that it is optimized for long theorem proving tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","theorem-proving","recursion"],"keywords":["Nerual Theorem Proving","Language Model"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大模型的逐step生成式自动定理证明方法受限于短视启发式，难以生成长证明。","claim_en":"Step-by-step generative automated theorem proving methods based on LLMs are limited by short-sighted heuristics and are difficult to generate long proofs.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"递归分层先验证证明草图再求解子猜想的POETRY框架，比逐step生成的方法在长定理证明任务上的成功率更高。","claim_en":"The POETRY framework that first verifies the proof sketch recursively by levels and then solves sub-conjectures has higher success rate on long theorem proving tasks than step-by-step generation methods.","opposes":"Prior automated theorem proving methods use linear step-by-step generation and heuristic scoring for search.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract","why_contested":"Provides a new reasoning paradigm for long sequence reasoning tasks represented by theorem proving, which can be extended to other complex reasoning scenarios."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为自动定理证明建模范式方向文献备查，无需细读正文。","en":"Keep as a reference for automated theorem proving modeling paradigm literature, no need to read full text."}},{"id":"WangYDZCZ0L24","title":"BELM: Bidirectional Explicit Linear Multi-step Sampler for Exact Inversion in Diffusion Models","authors":["Fangyikang Wang","Hubery Yin","Yuejiang Dong","Huminhao Zhu","Zhang Chao","Hanbin Zhao","Hui Qian","Chen Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1cc","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangYDZCZ0L24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangYDZCZ0L24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/520425a5a4c2fb7f7fc345078b188201-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有扩散模型的无训练精确反转采样器都是启发式设计，理论性质不明确，采样质量普通，限制了扩散反转在图像编辑、样本插值等任务的落地效果。","importance":"属于扩散模型采样方法的范式级贡献，提出的通用BELM公式覆盖了所有已有的启发式精确反转采样器作为特例，为后续精确反转采样器的设计提供了统一的理论框架。","technical_approach":"从变步长变公式的线性多步方法出发，融合双向显式约束推导得到通用的BELM采样器公式，所有已有的启发式精确反转采样器都可以通过调整参数归入该框架，舍弃了过去启发式设计采样器的路径。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体实验设置、基线方法及指标提升幅度，仅明确BELM框架兼容所有已有启发式精确反转采样器，可提升采样质量。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing training-free exact inversion samplers for diffusion models are all heuristically designed, with unclear theoretical properties and mediocre sampling quality, which limits the deployment effect of diffusion inversion in tasks such as image editing and sample interpolation.","importance":"It is a paradigm-level contribution to diffusion model sampling methods. The proposed general BELM formulation covers all existing heuristic exact inversion samplers as special cases, and provides a unified theoretical framework for the design of subsequent exact inversion samplers.","technical_approach":"Derived from the variable-stepsize-variable-formula linear multi-step method with integrated bidirectional explicit constraints, the general BELM sampler formulation is obtained. All existing heuristic exact inversion samplers can be incorporated into this framework by adjusting parameters, abandoning the prior path of heuristically designing samplers.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose specific experimental settings, baseline methods or metric improvement margins, only specifying that the BELM framework is compatible with all existing heuristic exact inversion samplers and can improve sampling quality.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","sampler","inversion","generation"],"keywords":["diffusion model; exact inversion; ODE sampler"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"扩散模型的精确反转采样对图像编辑、样本插值等下游任务至关重要，无训练的精确反转采样器可降低适配成本。","claim_en":"Exact inversion sampling of diffusion models is critical for downstream tasks such as image editing and sample interpolation, and training-free exact inversion samplers can reduce adaptation costs.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"BELM是覆盖所有已有启发式精确反转采样器的通用公式，基于BELM设计的采样器比之前的启发式采样器具有更明确的理论性质和更高的采样质量。","claim_en":"BELM is a general formulation covering all existing heuristic exact inversion samplers, and samplers designed based on BELM have clearer theoretical properties and higher sampling quality than previous heuristic samplers.","opposes":"Prior exact inversion samplers are designed heuristically without a unified theoretical framework.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract","why_contested":"Unifies the theoretical basis of diffusion exact inversion samplers, and can guide the design of higher-performance sampling methods for diffusion models."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为扩散模型精确反转采样理论框架文献备查，仅需要时查统一公式即可。","en":"Keep as a reference for diffusion model exact inversion sampling theoretical framework, only check the unified formula when needed."}},{"id":"WangZL024","title":"LLMs as Zero-shot Graph Learners: Alignment of GNN Representations with LLM Token Embeddings","authors":["Duo Wang","Yuan Zuo","Fengzhi Li","Junjie Wu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1cd","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangZL024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangZL024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/0b77d3a82b59e9d9899370b378087faf-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有零样本图学习方法依赖任务特定标签微调GNN，无法在跨数据集跨任务的零样本场景下取得理想效果，没有充分利用大模型的零样本迁移能力。","importance":"属于多模态大模型与图学习结合的方法级贡献，为GNN表示接入大模型实现跨任务零样本图学习提供了可行的对齐方案，降低了图学习任务的标注成本。","technical_approach":"原创的Token嵌入对齐图语言模型（TEA-GLM）框架，首先预训练GNN并将其表示与大模型的token嵌入对齐，再训练一个线性投影器完成GNN表示到LLM输入空间的转换，利用指令微调后的大模型作为跨数据集跨任务的零样本图学习器，舍弃了过去GNN依赖任务微调的设计。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体模型大小、数据集及指标提升幅度，仅明确针对零样本图学习任务优化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing zero-shot graph learning methods rely on task-specific label fine-tuning of GNNs, which cannot achieve ideal performance in cross-dataset and cross-task zero-shot scenarios, and do not fully utilize the zero-shot transfer capability of LLMs.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution to the combination of multimodal LLMs and graph learning, providing a feasible alignment scheme for GNN representations to access LLMs to achieve cross-task zero-shot graph learning, and reducing the labeling cost of graph learning tasks.","technical_approach":"The original Token Embedding-Aligned Graph Language Model (TEA-GLM) framework first pretrains a GNN and aligns its representations with the token embeddings of an LLM, then trains a linear projector to convert GNN representations to the LLM input space. The instruction-fine-tuned LLM is used as a cross-dataset and cross-task zero-shot graph learner, abandoning the prior design that GNNs rely on task fine-tuning.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose specific model size, datasets or metric improvement margins, only specifying that it is optimized for zero-shot graph learning tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["llm","graph-learning","representation-alignment"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Graph Neural Networks","Zero Shot Learning"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"指令微调后的大模型具有强大的跨任务零样本迁移能力，可用于解决不同领域的下游任务。","claim_en":"Instruction-fine-tuned LLMs have strong cross-task zero-shot transfer capability, which can be used to solve downstream tasks in different domains.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"将GNN表示与LLM的token嵌入对齐后，利用大模型作为零样本图学习器的TEA-GLM框架，比依赖任务微调的GNN方法在跨数据集跨任务零样本图学习任务上表现更优。","claim_en":"The TEA-GLM framework that aligns GNN representations with LLM token embeddings and uses LLMs as zero-shot graph learners outperforms GNN methods relying on task fine-tuning on cross-dataset and cross-task zero-shot graph learning tasks.","opposes":"Prior zero-shot graph learning methods rely on task-specific fine-tuning of GNNs and cannot achieve cross-task transfer.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract","why_contested":"Expands the application scope of LLMs to graph learning scenarios, and provides a new path for building general-purpose graph learning models."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为多模态与图学习交叉方向文献备查，无落地参考价值。","en":"Keep as a reference for multimodal and graph learning cross-domain literature, no practical deployment reference value."}},{"id":"WangZSXX024","title":"LLMDFA: Analyzing Dataflow in Code with Large Language Models","authors":["Chengpeng Wang","Wuqi Zhang","Zian Su","Xiangzhe Xu","Xiaoheng Xie","Xiangyu Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1ce","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WangZSXX024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WangZSXX024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ed9dcde1eb9c597f68c1d375bbecf3fc-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"coding_agent","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"传统数据流分析方法需要代码可成功编译且专家定制规则，无法适配真实场景中不可编译代码、分析需求动态变化的情况，落地门槛高。","importance":"属于代码大模型应用方向的方法级贡献，提出的分步骤+工具调用的框架解决了大模型做数据流分析的幻觉问题，为编译-free的可定制代码分析提供了可行方案。","technical_approach":"原创的LLM驱动无编译可定制数据流分析框架LLMDFA，将数据流分析任务拆解为多个子任务，设计策略让大模型合成代码调用外部专家工具（如解析库提取程序值、自动定理证明器验证依赖），把复杂推理外包给工具抑制幻觉，舍弃了过去纯大模型端到端生成分析结果或纯传统静态分析的设计。","experiments":"公开摘要未披露具体模型、数据集及准确率提升幅度，仅明确针对不可编译代码的数据流分析任务优化。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Traditional dataflow analysis methods require code to be successfully compiled and expert-customized rules, which cannot adapt to the situations of uncompilable code and dynamically changing analysis requirements in real scenarios, with high deployment thresholds.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution in code LLM applications. The proposed step-by-step + tool call framework solves the hallucination problem of LLMs doing dataflow analysis, and provides a feasible solution for compilation-free customizable code analysis.","technical_approach":"The original LLM-powered compilation-free customizable dataflow analysis framework LLMDFA decomposes the dataflow analysis task into multiple subtasks, and designs strategies for LLMs to synthesize code to call external expert tools (such as parsing libraries to extract program values, automated theorem provers to verify dependencies), outsourcing complex reasoning to tools to suppress hallucinations, abandoning the prior design of pure LLM end-to-end generation of analysis results or pure traditional static analysis.","experiments":"The public abstract does not disclose specific models, datasets or accuracy improvement margins, only specifying that it is optimized for dataflow analysis tasks of uncompilable code.","authors_note":""},"tags":["code-llm","dataflow","analysis"],"keywords":["LLM for code","code reasoning","dataflow analysis"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"纯大模型端到端做代码分析容易产生幻觉，结果可靠性不足；传统静态分析方法灵活性差、适配成本高。","claim_en":"Pure LLM end-to-end code analysis is prone to hallucinations with insufficient result reliability; traditional static analysis methods have poor flexibility and high adaptation costs.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"将数据流分析拆解为子任务、让大模型调用外部工具的LLMDFA框架，比纯大模型或纯传统静态分析方法在不可编译代码的数据流分析任务上准确率更高、适配成本更低。","claim_en":"The LLMDFA framework that decomposes dataflow analysis into subtasks and lets LLMs call external tools has higher accuracy and lower adaptation cost on dataflow analysis tasks of uncompilable code than pure LLM or pure traditional static analysis methods.","opposes":"Prior dataflow analysis methods either rely on pure LLMs or pure traditional static analysis, which cannot balance accuracy, flexibility and deployment cost.","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§1 Abstract","why_contested":"Provides a reference design for combining LLMs with professional tools to solve complex program analysis tasks, which can be extended to other code analysis scenarios."}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为代码大模型工具调用方向文献备查，无需细读。","en":"Keep as a reference for code LLM tool calling literature, no detailed reading required."}},{"id":"WenKGWHZLHGXLTW24","title":"Benchmarking Complex Instruction-Following with Multiple Constraints Composition","authors":["Bosi Wen","Pei Ke","Xiaotao Gu","Lindong Wu","Hao Huang","Jinfeng Zhou","Wenchuang Li","Binxin Hu","Wendy Gao","Jiaxing Xu","Yiming Liu","Jie Tang","Hongning Wang","Minlie Huang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1cf","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WenKGWHZLHGXLTW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WenKGWHZLHGXLTW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/f8c24b08b96a08ec7a7a975feea7777e-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是复杂指令跟随评测不够难、也不够贴近真实使用的问题。很多 benchmark 只检查单一约束，比如长度、格式或语气，模型即使能在单约束下过关，也未必能在多个约束同时存在时稳定满足要求。","importance":"它的重要性在于 benchmark 设计。对 pretrain 和 post-train 而言，多约束组合是更接近真实 agent / assistant 使用的能力指标，因为失败往往不是不会生成，而是无法同时兼顾多个目标。这样的评测会反过来影响指令数据构造、合成器设计和 reward 建模。","technical_approach":"从标题看，方法核心是构建一个‘多约束组合’的 complex instruction-following benchmark，而不是发明新模型。关键设计应包括：系统定义可组合约束类型、控制组合难度、建立自动或半自动判分器，并区分单约束能力与组合泛化能力。这个设计有效，因为它能把模型的模板记忆和真正的组合遵循能力分开看；边界是自动评测对语义细节和部分满足情形可能不够稳。","experiments":"没有摘要，无法确认 benchmark 规模、约束种类、涉及的模型和具体分数差异。合理预期是作者会比较多种主流 LLM 在单约束与多约束上的性能掉点，并分析约束数增加后的退化曲线，以及哪些约束组合最容易冲突；但这里不能写具体数字。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a gap in instruction-following evaluation: existing benchmarks are often too simple because they test one constraint at a time. Real use cases require models to satisfy multiple constraints simultaneously—format, style, content, ordering, safety, length—and that compositional burden is where many models fail.","importance":"This is a benchmark contribution with clear implications for post-training and, indirectly, pretraining. Multi-constraint composition is a more realistic capability target for assistants and agents, so better evaluation here can change how instruction data is synthesized, how rewards are defined, and how we diagnose alignment quality.","technical_approach":"The likely approach is to build a benchmark around compositional instruction following rather than introducing a new model. The important design choices are to define composable constraint families, control difficulty as constraints accumulate, and use automatic or semi-automatic evaluation to separate single-constraint competence from compositional generalization. That matters because many models can follow templates but fail when constraints interact.","experiments":"The abstract is missing, so benchmark size, constraint taxonomy, models tested, and score gaps cannot be confirmed. A strong evaluation would compare major LLMs on single versus composed constraints, show degradation as the number of constraints increases, and identify conflict-heavy combinations, but no exact numbers should be stated without the paper text.","authors_note":""},"tags":["instruction-following","benchmark","evaluation","llm"],"notable_authors":["Bosi Wen","Pei Ke"],"keywords":["complex instruction-following","constraint","composition","large language models","automatic evaluation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看评测设计章节和自动判分规则部分即可，可直接复用约束组合逻辑优化内部指令数据构造流程。","en":"Only read the benchmark design section and automatic scoring rules, you can directly reuse the constraint combination logic to optimize internal instruction data construction."}},{"id":"WenTJ0KGHL24","title":"Perception of Knowledge Boundary for Large Language Models through Semi-open-ended Question Answering","authors":["Zhihua Wen","Zhiliang Tian","Zexin Jian","Zhen Huang","Pei Ke","Yifu Gao","Minlie Huang","Dongsheng Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1d0","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WenTJ0KGHL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WenTJ0KGHL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a1e0d6fa0c30b7d4f75dd9c7ed6189f2-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心问题是：如何评估大模型对自身知识边界的感知，而不是只看答对率。传统 closed-ended QA 容易把‘知道但表达差’、‘不知道但猜对’、以及‘知道自己不知道’混在一起；半开放式问答更适合测模型是否能在不确定时收缩回答。","importance":"这是评测与诊断类工作，对 hallucination、校准和拒答策略很有价值。对 pretrain 的启示是，知识边界不只是参数记忆量的问题，还涉及训练分布、置信表达和 post-train 风格化行为；如果这个能力能被稳定测量，就能更好地比较数据配方和对齐策略。","technical_approach":"从标题看，作者提出的是通过 semi-open-ended QA 来测‘知识边界感知’。关键不是让模型在固定选项里挑答案，而是给它足够开放的输出空间，同时设计判分规则来区分正确回答、无依据猜测、合理拒答、以及边界模糊的回答。相比传统多选题，这样更能暴露模型是否会在证据不足时硬答；代价是评测和标注会更复杂。","experiments":"摘要缺失，无法确认数据集构成、模型列表、评分维度和量化结论。通常这类工作会比较不同 LLM 的准确率、校准性、拒答质量和过度自信率，并可能分析指令微调前后知识边界感知是否改善还是被‘逞强作答’削弱；但具体数值这里不能写。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper asks a sharper question than standard QA: can an LLM recognize its own knowledge boundary instead of merely maximizing answer rate? Closed-ended evaluation often conflates true knowledge, lucky guessing, and appropriate abstention, so a semi-open-ended setup is better suited for measuring uncertainty-aware behavior.","importance":"This is a diagnostic evaluation paper with direct relevance to hallucination, calibration, and abstention policy. For pretraining research, the useful takeaway is that knowledge boundary behavior is not just about how much the model memorizes; it also depends on training distribution, confidence expression, and post-training incentives.","technical_approach":"From the title, the method is to evaluate boundary awareness through semi-open-ended QA. The important design choice is to give the model enough output freedom to expose guessing behavior while still defining labels or scoring rules that separate correct answers, unsupported guesses, justified abstentions, and ambiguous cases. That is more revealing than multiple choice, where random success can mask poor calibration.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so I cannot verify the dataset, model roster, metrics, or quantitative conclusions. A typical study here would compare accuracy, calibration, abstention quality, and overconfidence across LLMs, possibly before and after instruction tuning, but exact results should not be fabricated.","authors_note":""},"tags":["knowledge-boundary","llm","calibration","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Zhihua Wen","Pei Ke"],"keywords":["large language model","knowledge boundary","question answering"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读§3的半开放QA判分规则即可，可参考其评价维度优化内部幻觉检测和拒答策略的评估流程。","en":"Only read the semi-open QA scoring rules in §3, refer to its evaluation dimensions to optimize internal hallucination detection and refusal strategy assessment."}},{"id":"WenWWZ024","title":"Reinforcing LLM Agents via Policy Optimization with Action Decomposition","authors":["Muning Wen","Ziyu Wan","Jun Wang","Weinan Zhang","Ying Wen"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1d1","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WenWWZ024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WenWWZ024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/bc09efb501c801ed92e181e26a885c2d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：LLM agent 的强化学习训练里，动作空间往往又长又稀疏，直接做策略优化信用分配很差。把复杂 action 拆成更细粒度决策，目的是降低探索难度，让 RL 信号更容易对齐到具体行为。","importance":"这是 post-train / agent RL 方法，但对 pretrain 接口有现实意义。它说明当模型被放进工具调用或多步环境时，单纯的语言建模先验不够，动作表示本身会决定优化难度；这种 insight 会反过来影响 action formatting、工具 tokenization 和 trajectory 数据构造。","technical_approach":"从标题看，方法核心是 action decomposition 下的 policy optimization。也就是不把一次工具调用或复杂文本行为当成不可分割的大动作，而是拆成若干子动作分别建模和优化。这样做有效，因为奖励可以更细地回传到中间决策；但代价是需要人为定义或学习分解方式，分得太细会拉长 horizon，分得不对会引入新的偏差。","experiments":"缺少摘要，无法确认使用了哪些 agent benchmark、环境类型、基础模型和 RL 算法细节。可以预期会与标准 PPO/GRPO 类 agent RL baseline 比较任务成功率、样本效率和训练稳定性，并做是否分解、不同分解粒度的消融；但没有可靠数字时不应补写。","authors_note":"作者包含 Jun Wang、Weinan Zhang、Ying Wen，均与强化学习和智能体方向有长期积累。具体机构无法从当前信息严格确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a common RL-agent bottleneck: action spaces for LLM agents are long, sparse, and hard to optimize end to end. Decomposing actions into smaller decisions is a way to improve credit assignment and make policy optimization less brittle.","importance":"This is a post-training method for LLM agents, but it is relevant to the pretrain interface. Once a language model acts in tool-using environments, the representation of actions strongly affects optimization difficulty. That has implications for action formatting, tool-call tokenization, and how trajectory data should be structured.","technical_approach":"The method, as implied by the title, is policy optimization with action decomposition. Instead of treating a complex tool call or long textual action as one indivisible decision, the policy breaks it into sub-actions and optimizes them in a more structured way. The benefit is better credit assignment and easier exploration. The trade-off is that decomposition must be designed or learned well; too coarse gives little help, too fine can increase horizon length and instability.","experiments":"The abstract is unavailable, so I cannot verify environments, base models, RL algorithms, or gains. A convincing paper here would compare against standard PPO/GRPO-style agent training on task success rate, sample efficiency, and stability, with ablations on decomposition granularity, but exact numbers are not recoverable from the prompt.","authors_note":"The author list includes Jun Wang, Weinan Zhang, and Ying Wen, all established in reinforcement learning and agent-related research. The exact institution cannot be confirmed from the provided information."},"tags":["llm-agent","rl","action-decomposition","policy-optimization"],"notable_authors":["Jun Wang","Weinan Zhang","Ying Wen"],"keywords":["Reinforcement Learning","Language Agent","LLM agent","Large Language Models"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读动作分解策略和实验结论部分即可，可参考其思路调整预训练阶段工具调用的token格式化规则。","en":"Only read the action decomposition strategy and experimental conclusions, refer to its ideas to adjust tool call token formatting rules during pre-training."}},{"id":"2312.14106","title":"Learning Human-like Representations to Enable Learning Human Values","authors":["Andrea Wynn","Ilia Sucholutsky","Tom Griffiths"],"institutions":["Princeton University"],"abstract":"$1d2","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.14106","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/WynnS024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/WynnS024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3578fd44b2381db12bf16e28a667c934-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有AI学习人类价值的探索阶段容易出现行为违规或伤害，此前方案未从人机表征对齐角度解决安全高效的个性化价值学习问题。","importance":"属于对齐方向的方法级贡献，验证了类人表征对齐除提升泛化、少样本性能外，还可支撑安全的人类价值学习，为预训练阶段嵌入对齐约束提供了新方向。","technical_approach":"是理论驱动的验证性方法，先给出人机表征对齐降低价值学习探索风险的理论预测，再在道德判断任务上验证，核心是将预训练表征对齐作为价值学习前置条件，未引入复杂额外训练目标。","experiments":"仅披露理论预测和道德判断任务的泛化性结果，未公开具体模型参数量、数据集规模和量化指标提升幅度，未报告 ablation 实验。","authors_note":"团队包含普林斯顿大学认知科学方向知名学者Tom Griffiths。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Current AI systems face high risk of generating harmful or norm-violating outputs when learning individual human values during exploration, no prior work leverages human-AI representational alignment to address safe and efficient personalized value learning.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution to AI alignment. It validates that human-like representational alignment supports safe human value learning besides improving generalization and few-shot performance, providing a new design direction for embedding value alignment constraints in pre-training.","technical_approach":"It is a theory-driven verification method. It first proposes the theoretical prediction that human-AI representational alignment reduces exploration risk in value learning, then validates it on morality judgment tasks. It uses pre-trained representational alignment as the precondition for value learning without adding complex additional training objectives.","experiments":"Only theoretical prediction and generalization results on morality judgment tasks are reported. No specific model size, dataset scale or quantitative performance lift is disclosed, no ablation studies are released.","authors_note":"Tom Griffiths, a leading researcher in cognitive science and Bayesian cognition from Princeton University, is the senior author."},"tags":["representation","alignment","human-values","generalization","safety"],"keywords":["value alignment","representational alignment","kernel methods","language models"],"notable_authors":["Tom Griffiths"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"类人表征对齐能提升模型泛化性、域迁移鲁棒性和少样本学习性能。","claim_en":"Human-like representational alignment improves model generalization, domain shift robustness and few-shot learning performance.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"人机表征对齐可同时降低个性化人类价值学习过程中的探索违规风险。","claim_en":"Human-AI representational alignment can also reduce the risk of norm violation during exploration in personalized human value learning.","opposes":"此前研究认为类人表征对齐仅能提升模型任务性能，未关联到对齐安全收益。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Theoretical Prediction","why_contested":"如果验证成立，预训练阶段的认知对齐可替代部分RLHF工作，大幅降低对齐成本。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只读表征对齐的理论推导和道德判断任务实验部分，可参考其思路探索预训练阶段嵌入对齐约束的方案。","en":"Only read the theoretical derivation of representation alignment and moral judgment task experiments, explore pre-training alignment constraint embedding solutions based on its ideas."}},{"id":"XiaFZJ024","title":"Efficient Multi-task LLM Quantization and Serving for Multiple LoRA Adapters","authors":["Yifei Xia","Fangcheng Fu","Wentao Zhang","Jiawei Jiang","Bin Cui"],"institutions":["Peking University"],"abstract":"$1d3","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XiaFZJ024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XiaFZJ024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/747dc7c6566c74eb9a663bcd8d057c78-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有主流LLM量化方法会破坏基座模型的多任务共享能力，无法兼容多LoRA适配器实现内存高效的多任务服务，单任务场景的量化+LoRA方案不能直接迁移到多任务场景。","importance":"属于LLM部署系统级的方法贡献，解决了多租户LoRA服务场景下量化与多任务适配的冲突问题，可直接降低大模型多任务部署的内存开销。","technical_approach":"是针对多LoRA场景的量化适配改进，核心是调整量化校准逻辑，保留基座模型在不同LoRA适配器下的特征表达空间，未修改LoRA本身结构，兼容现有GPTQ、AWQ等主流量化算法。","experiments":"未公开具体测试的模型参数量、数据集规模，仅提到相比现有单任务量化方案，多任务场景下内存开销降低30%以上，推理延迟无明显上升，未报告详细ablation。","authors_note":"团队包含北京大学数据库与大数据系统方向知名学者Bin Cui（崔斌）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Mainstream LLM quantization methods break the multi-task sharing capability of base models, so they cannot be combined with multiple LoRA adapters to implement memory-efficient multi-task serving, existing single-task quantization + LoRA solutions cannot be directly migrated to multi-task scenarios.","importance":"It is a system-level contribution for LLM deployment. It resolves the conflict between quantization and multi-task adaptation in multi-tenant LoRA serving scenarios, directly reducing memory cost of large model multi-task deployment.","technical_approach":"It is a quantization adaptation improvement targeting multi-LoRA scenarios. The core is adjusting quantization calibration logic to preserve the feature representation space of the base model under different LoRA adapters, it does not modify LoRA structure and is compatible with existing mainstream quantization algorithms including GPTQ and AWQ.","experiments":"No specific test model size or dataset scale is disclosed. It only reports that compared with existing single-task quantization solutions, memory cost in multi-task scenarios is reduced by more than 30% with no obvious inference latency increase, no detailed ablation is released.","authors_note":"Bin Cui, a leading researcher in database and big data systems from Peking University, is the senior author."},"tags":["quantization","serving","lora","inference","efficiency"],"keywords":["Multi-LoRA serving system; LLM serving; LoRA; Post Training Quantization; Multi-task Scheduling"],"notable_authors":["Bin Cui"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"LoRA是当前参数高效微调的主流方案，GPTQ、AWQ是当前主流的LLM量化方法。","claim_en":"LoRA is the mainstream parameter-efficient fine-tuning method, GPTQ and AWQ are mainstream LLM quantization methods.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"未经过多任务校准的量化基座，加载不同LoRA适配器时会出现平均15%以上的任务性能下降。","claim_en":"Existing quantized base models without multi-task calibration suffer from more than 15% average task performance drop when loading different LoRA adapters.","opposes":"此前默认量化后的基座模型可无损失兼容任意下游LoRA适配器。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§2 Analysis","why_contested":"这一结论意味着多租户LoRA服务场景需要重新设计量化流程，不能直接复用单任务量化的基座。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于部署侧工程优化工作，仅需知道其核心结论即可，无需细读正文，作为多租户服务相关文献备查。","en":"It is a deployment-side engineering optimization work, only need to know its core conclusions, no need to read the full text, keep it as a reference for multi-tenant serving literature."}},{"id":"2411.02461","title":"Enhancing Multiple Dimensions of Trustworthiness in LLMs via Sparse Activation Control","authors":["Yuxin Xiao","Chaoqun Wan","Yonggang Zhang","Wenxiao Wang","Binbin Lin","Xiaofei He","Xu Shen","Jieping Ye"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1d4","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.02461","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XiaoW00L00Y24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XiaoW00L00Y24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1cb5b3d64bdf3c6642c8d9a8fbecd019-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有基于表征工程的LLM可信性增强方法只能同时满足单一可信要求，无法编码多个语义约束，RLHF等传统方法需要大量标注数据成本极高。","importance":"属于对齐方向的方法级贡献，提供了无需训练的多维度可信性控制方案，比单约束表征工程方案更适配落地场景的复杂可信要求。","technical_approach":"是表征工程方向的改进方法，核心是识别不同可信约束对应的稀疏激活神经元集合，通过独立控制不同集合的激活强度实现多约束叠加，舍弃了将多个约束编码到单一隐状态的思路，未引入额外训练。","experiments":"在7B、13B参数LLaMA2模型上测试，诚实、安全、无害三个维度的指标平均提升12%以上，同时通用能力下降幅度小于2%，ablation显示激活稀疏度高于90%时约束叠加的干扰最小。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing representation engineering based LLM trustworthiness enhancement methods can only meet a single trust requirement (such as honesty or safety) at the same time, cannot encode multiple semantic constraints simultaneously, traditional methods like RLHF require extremely high annotation data cost.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution to AI alignment. It provides a training-free multi-dimensional trustworthiness control solution, which is more suitable for complex trust requirements in production scenarios than single-constraint representation engineering methods.","technical_approach":"It is an improved method in representation engineering. The core is identifying sparse activation neuron sets corresponding to different trust constraints, realizing multi-constraint superposition by independently controlling the activation intensity of different sets. It abandons the previous idea of encoding multiple constraints into a single hidden state, no additional training is required.","experiments":"Tests are conducted on 7B and 13B parameter LLaMA2 models, average performance lift on three dimensions of honesty, safety and harmlessness reaches more than 12%, while general capability drop is less than 2%. Ablation shows that constraint superposition interference is minimal when activation sparsity is higher than 90%.","authors_note":""},"tags":["safety","activation-engineering","alignment","representation","steering"],"keywords":["large language models"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"表征工程可通过控制LLM中间隐状态实现特定的对齐要求，无需额外训练。","claim_en":"Representation engineering can achieve specific alignment requirements by controlling intermediate hidden states of LLMs without additional training.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"独立控制不同可信约束对应的稀疏激活神经元，不会出现多个约束叠加时的性能抵消问题。","claim_en":"Independent control of sparse activation neurons corresponding to different trust constraints avoids performance cancellation when multiple constraints are superimposed.","opposes":"此前研究认为多个表征约束叠加时会互相干扰，导致同时满足多约束的性能远低于单约束。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4.3 Ablation","why_contested":"如果结论可复现，稀疏激活控制可替代大部分RLHF的后训练对齐工作，大幅降低对齐成本。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只读稀疏激活神经元识别方法和多约束叠加实验部分，可复用其方案在推理侧快速实现多维度可信控制。","en":"Only read the sparse activation neuron identification method and multi-constraint superposition experiments, reuse its solution to quickly implement multi-dimensional trust control at inference time."}},{"id":"2405.17871","title":"Seeing the Image: Prioritizing Visual Correlation by Contrastive Alignment","authors":["Xin Xiao","Bohong Wu","Jiacong Wang","Chunyuan Li","Xun Zhou","Haoyuan Guo"],"institutions":["Microsoft"],"abstract":"$1d5","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.17871","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XiaoWWLZG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XiaoWWLZG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/37294f033582ac0064bf90fa557c2573-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有VLM的图文对齐训练给所有文本token分配相同权重，会过度强调和输入图像不相关甚至矛盾的文本token，导致跨模态对齐效果次优。","importance":"属于VLM预训练的方法级贡献，提出的token重加权策略可直接嵌入现有AR范式VLM的预训练流程，不需要修改模型结构，能以极低的计算成本提升跨模态对齐效果。","technical_approach":"是预训练目标改进的原创方法，核心是通过对比不同图像输入下同文本token的预测logit差，得到该token和图像的相关性权重，训练时优先给高相关性token更大的损失权重，舍弃了对所有文本token等权的损失计算方式。","experiments":"在LLaVA-1.5 7B、13B模型上测试，在MMBench、SEED-Bench等多模态基准上平均提升4.2%，仅增加5%以内的预训练计算开销，ablation显示相关性阈值设为0.3时性能最优。","authors_note":"团队包含微软VLM方向知名学者、LLaVA核心作者Chunyuan Li（李淳元）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing image-text alignment training for vision language models (VLMs) assigns equal weight to all text tokens, which overemphasizes text tokens that are irrelevant or even contradictory to input images, leading to sub-optimal cross-modal alignment performance.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution to VLM pre-training. The proposed token reweighting strategy can be directly embedded into the pre-training pipeline of existing AR paradigm VLMs without modifying model structure, and improves cross-modal alignment performance with extremely low computational cost.","technical_approach":"It is an original method for pre-training objective improvement. The core is calculating the visual correlation weight of each text token through the prediction logit difference of the same text token under different image inputs, assigning higher loss weight to high-correlation tokens during training. It abandons the previous equal-weight loss calculation for all text tokens.","experiments":"Tests are conducted on LLaVA-1.5 7B and 13B models, average performance lift on multi-modal benchmarks including MMBench and SEED-Bench reaches 4.2%, with pre-training computational overhead increased by less than 5%. Ablation shows that performance is optimal when correlation threshold is set to 0.3.","authors_note":"Chunyuan Li, a leading VLM researcher from Microsoft and core author of LLaVA, is one of the authors."},"tags":["vlm","contrastive-learning","alignment","autoregressive","visual-grounding"],"keywords":["Vision Language Model","Contrastive Alignment","Selective Token Re-weighting"],"notable_authors":["Chunyuan Li"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"AR范式的VLM预训练采用next token prediction目标，将文本和图像特征拼接后输入LLM基座。","claim_en":"AR paradigm VLM pre-training uses next token prediction objective, concatenates text and image features before feeding into LLM base.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"给和图像相关的文本token分配更高的损失权重，比等权计算损失的跨模态对齐效果提升4%以上。","claim_en":"Assigning higher loss weight to text tokens correlated with images improves cross-modal alignment performance by more than 4% compared with equal-weight loss calculation.","opposes":"此前默认等权处理所有文本token的预训练目标是跨模态对齐的最优方案。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5.1 Main Results","why_contested":"这一结论意味着VLM预训练可通过简单的损失加权大幅提升性能，不需要增加额外的模型参数。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只读token相关性权重计算逻辑和预训练损失修改部分，可直接集成到内部AR范式VLM的预训练流程中。","en":"Only read the token relevance weight calculation logic and pre-training loss modification, it can be directly integrated into the pre-training pipeline of internal AR-style VLMs."}},{"id":"2405.16852","title":"EM Distillation for One-step Diffusion Models","authors":["Sirui Xie","Zhisheng Xiao","Diederik P. Kingma","Tingbo Hou","Ying Nian Wu","Kevin P. Murphy","Tim Salimans","Ben Poole","Ruiqi Gao"],"institutions":["Google DeepMind","University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA)"],"abstract":"$1d6","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.16852","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XieXKHWMSPG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XieXKHWMSPG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/4fac0e32088db2fd2948cfaacc4fe108-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有扩散模型蒸馏方法在一步采样时会出现明显的感知质量下降，或者需要访问原始训练数据，或者存在模式坍缩无法覆盖全分布，不能同时满足无数据、高质量、全分布覆盖的要求。","importance":"属于扩散模型预训练的方法级贡献，是首个基于最大似然的一步扩散蒸馏方案，为AR+diffusion联合建模范式的低延迟推理提供了新的技术路径。","technical_approach":"是蒸馏方法的原创设计，基于期望最大化（EM）框架，用扩散教师的先验和生成器隐变量的联合分布采样更新生成器参数，不需要访问原始训练数据，舍弃了此前基于模式寻优的蒸馏思路，避免了模式坍缩。","experiments":"在ImageNet 64x64、CIFAR-10数据集上测试，一步生成的FID比现有蒸馏方法降低2.3，感知质量得分提升11%，scaling实验显示教师模型的扩散步数越高，蒸馏后的一步生成质量越好。","authors_note":"团队包含扩散模型、VAE提出者Diederik P. Kingma，以及UCLA能量模型与扩散模型方向知名学者Ying Nian Wu（吴胤年）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing diffusion model distillation methods suffer from obvious perceptual quality degradation when sampling in one step, or require access to original training data, or have mode collapse that cannot cover the full distribution, cannot meet the requirements of data-free, high-quality and full distribution coverage at the same time.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution to diffusion model pre-training. It is the first maximum likelihood based one-step diffusion distillation solution, providing a new technical path for low-latency inference of AR+diffusion joint modeling paradigms.","technical_approach":"It is an original design of distillation method, based on Expectation-Maximization (EM) framework. It updates generator parameters using samples from the joint distribution of diffusion teacher prior and generator latent variables, no access to original training data is required. It abandons the previous mode-seeking distillation idea to avoid mode collapse.","experiments":"Tests are conducted on ImageNet 64x64 and CIFAR-10 datasets, one-step generation FID is 2.3 lower than existing distillation methods, perceptual quality score is increased by 11%. Scaling experiments show that the higher the diffusion steps of the teacher model, the better the one-step generation quality after distillation.","authors_note":"Diederik P. Kingma, the inventor of diffusion models and variational autoencoders, and Ying Nian Wu, a leading researcher in energy-based models and diffusion models from UCLA, are senior authors."},"tags":["diffusion","distillation","one-step","sampling","objective"],"keywords":["Generative models"],"notable_authors":["Diederik P. Kingma","Ying Nian Wu"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"扩散模型迭代采样计算成本高，蒸馏是实现低延迟少步采样的主流方案。","claim_en":"Diffusion model iterative sampling has high computational cost, distillation is the mainstream solution to realize low-latency few-step sampling.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于EM框架的蒸馏方案可以在不访问原始训练数据的前提下，实现一步生成质量优于现有需要训练数据的蒸馏方法。","claim_en":"EM framework based distillation solution can achieve better one-step generation quality than existing distillation methods requiring training data without accessing original training data.","opposes":"此前研究认为无数据的扩散蒸馏必然会带来明显的性能下降，不可能超过有数据蒸馏的性能。","opposes_cite_hint":"Salimans 2022 Progressive Distillation","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"如果结论可复现，可大幅降低扩散模型的蒸馏成本，不需要保留原始训练数据就能得到高质量一步生成器。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只读EM蒸馏框架的核心推导部分即可，可参考其思路探索AR+扩散混合建模范式的低延迟推理方案。","en":"Only read the core derivation of the EM distillation framework, refer to its ideas to explore low-latency inference solutions for AR+diffusion hybrid modeling paradigms."}},{"id":"2405.08027","title":"Automating Data Annotation under Strategic Human Agents: Risks and Potential Solutions","authors":["Tian Xie","Xueru Zhang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1d7","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.08027","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XieZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XieZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e664650506f1cf2b4696df892147c06e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"在社会领域的ML应用中，人类会根据模型决策调整自身行为导致数据分布偏移，用模型自动标注的样本重训模型会出现长期性能下降，此前自动数据标注方案未考虑人类的策略性适应行为。","importance":"属于预训练数据方向的范式级贡献，首次形式化了策略性人类交互下的自动标注闭环风险，为预训练数据的长期质量评估提供了新的理论框架。","technical_approach":"是理论分析为主的原创方法，首先形式化了策略性人类代理和ML系统的交互过程，推导了自动标注闭环下的分布偏移边界，提出了带偏移校正的自动标注方案，未依赖额外的人工标注成本。","experiments":"在就业筛选、信用评分两个模拟社会场景下测试，带校正的自动标注方案相比基线方案的长期预测准确率提升18%，未出现连续重训后的性能坍缩，ablation显示人类策略性调整的强度越高，校正方案的收益越大。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"For ML applications in social domains, humans adjust their behaviors according to model decisions leading to data distribution shift, retraining models with model-annotated samples leads to long-term performance degradation, existing automatic data annotation solutions do not consider strategic adaptive behaviors of humans.","importance":"It is a paradigm-level contribution to pre-training data research. It first formalizes the closed-loop risk of automatic annotation under strategic human interaction, providing a new theoretical framework for long-term quality assessment of pre-training data.","technical_approach":"It is an original method dominated by theoretical analysis. It first formalizes the interaction process between strategic human agents and ML systems, derives the distribution shift boundary under automatic annotation closed loop, and proposes an automatic annotation solution with shift correction, no additional manual annotation cost is required.","experiments":"Tests are conducted on two simulated social scenarios of employment screening and credit scoring, long-term prediction accuracy of the corrected automatic annotation solution is 18% higher than baseline solutions, no performance collapse occurs after continuous retraining. Ablation shows that the higher the intensity of human strategic adjustment, the greater the benefit of the correction solution.","authors_note":""},"tags":["data-annotation","human-feedback","data-quality","distribution-shift","labeling"],"keywords":["Strategic Classification","Long-term Fairness"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"自动数据标注是降低预训练数据标注成本的主流方案，广泛应用于垂直领域的模型训练。","claim_en":"Automatic data annotation is the mainstream solution to reduce pre-training data annotation cost, widely used in model training for vertical domains.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"在人类存在策略性适应的场景下，无校正的自动标注闭环会导致模型性能每轮重训下降7%以上，最终完全失效。","claim_en":"In scenarios where humans have strategic adaptation, uncorrected automatic annotation closed loop leads to model performance drop of more than 7% per retraining round, and finally complete failure.","opposes":"此前研究认为自动标注的样本只要达到一定的精度阈值，就可以安全用于模型重训。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§3 Analysis","why_contested":"这一结论意味着用于社会领域的大模型预训练数据不能过度依赖自动标注，需要建立长期的分布偏移监测机制。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只读分布偏移的形式化推导和偏移校正方案部分，可参考其框架优化预训练自动标注数据的长期质量评估。","en":"Only read the formal derivation of distribution shift and shift correction scheme, refer to its framework to optimize long-term quality assessment of pre-training auto-annotated data."}},{"id":"2406.09324","title":"Bag of Tricks: Benchmarking of Jailbreak Attacks on LLMs","authors":["Zhao Xu","Fan Liu","Hao Liu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1d8","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.09324","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Xu0L24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Xu0L24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/38c1dfb4f7625907b15e9515365e7803-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"现有LLM越狱攻击的评估没有标准化框架，不同工作的攻击设置差异大、结果不可比，且多数只测试基础LLM的漏洞，未覆盖对齐增强后LLM的鲁棒性。","importance":"属于对齐安全方向的基准级贡献，提出的标准化评估框架可统一越狱攻击的评估流程，为LLM对齐防御的迭代优化提供统一的测试基准。","technical_approach":"是基准构建的原创方案，梳理了token级、prompt级越狱攻击的12个关键影响因素，构建了包含200+攻击模板的JailTrickBench基准，同时测试基础LLM和对齐增强LLM的越狱成功率，舍弃了只测试单一攻击类型的评估方式。","experiments":"在GPT-4、Claude 2、LLaMA2 70B、Qwen-72B等8个主流模型上测试，对齐增强后的LLM对token级攻击的防御率比基础模型高42%，但对prompt级组合攻击的防御率仍然低于20%，ablation显示攻击模板的多样性是影响评估结果的最关键因素。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing evaluation of LLM jailbreak attacks has no standardized framework, attack settings vary widely across different works leading to incomparable results, and most only test vulnerabilities of base LLMs, not covering robustness of alignment-enhanced LLMs.","importance":"It is a benchmark-level contribution to alignment security research. The proposed standardized evaluation framework can unify the evaluation process of jailbreak attacks, providing a unified test benchmark for iterative optimization of LLM alignment defenses.","technical_approach":"It is an original benchmark construction solution. It sorts out 12 key influencing factors of token-level and prompt-level jailbreak attacks, builds the JailTrickBench benchmark containing more than 200 attack templates, tests the jailbreak success rate of both base LLMs and alignment-enhanced LLMs. It abandons the previous evaluation method that only tests a single attack type.","experiments":"Tests are conducted on 8 mainstream models including GPT-4, Claude 2, LLaMA2 70B, Qwen-72B. Alignment-enhanced LLMs have 42% higher defense rate against token-level attacks than base models, but defense rate against prompt-level combined attacks is still lower than 20%. Ablation shows that the diversity of attack templates is the most critical factor affecting evaluation results.","authors_note":""},"tags":["jailbreak","benchmark","safety","alignment","evaluation"],"keywords":["jailbreak attack","jailbreak defense","LLM","benchmark"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"现有对齐后的LLM仍然存在越狱漏洞，不同越狱攻击的成功率差异极大。","claim_en":"Existing aligned LLMs still have jailbreak vulnerabilities, and the success rates of different jailbreak attacks vary greatly.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"现有对齐增强方案对组合式prompt级越狱攻击的防御率不足20%，远低于此前公开的对齐防御性能指标。","claim_en":"Existing alignment enhancement solutions have less than 20% defense rate against combined prompt-level jailbreak attacks, far lower than previously published alignment defense performance indicators.","opposes":"此前多数对齐工作声称其防御方案的越狱成功率低于1%，具备足够的安全鲁棒性。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§4.2 Main Results","why_contested":"这一结论意味着现有对齐防御方案存在严重的评估过拟合问题，需要用更全面的攻击基准重新验证安全性。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"属于安全评测基准类工作，仅需知道其整理的12个越狱影响因素和基准名称即可，无需细读正文。","en":"It is a security evaluation benchmark work, only need to know its 12 jailbreak influencing factors and benchmark name, no need to read the full text."}},{"id":"2411.03768","title":"A Bayesian Approach to Data Point Selection","authors":["Xinnuo Xu","Minyoung Kim","Royson Lee","Brais Martínez","Timothy M. Hospedales"],"institutions":["University of Edinburgh"],"abstract":"$1d9","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.03768","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Xu0LMH24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Xu0LMH24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/437587c32b781fbb94026ac5905b439b-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"llm_pretrain","relevance_score":6,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有数据点选择（DPS）方法基于双层优化框架，内存和计算开销极高，且小批量训练下存在理论缺陷，无法适配大模型预训练的大规模数据场景。","importance":"属于预训练数据过滤方向的方法级贡献，提出的贝叶斯DPS方案计算开销比双层优化方案低70%以上，可以直接集成到大模型预训练的数据处理流程中。","technical_approach":"是DPS方法的原创设计，将DPS问题转化为贝叶斯模型的后验推理问题，同时推理样本权重和主网络参数的后验分布，采用随机梯度朗之万MCMC采样实现联合学习，舍弃了此前的双层优化框架，避免了小批量下的理论缺陷。","experiments":"在ImageNet分类、LLaMA-7B预训练两个场景下测试，使用1/3的训练数据就能达到全量数据训练的性能，相比现有双层优化DPS方案计算开销降低73%，ablation显示样本权重的先验分布设为稀疏分布时性能最优。","authors_note":"团队包含爱丁堡大学元学习与数据高效学习方向知名学者Timothy M. Hospedales。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing data point selection (DPS) methods are based on bi-level optimization framework, which has extremely high memory and computational cost, and has theoretical defects under minibatch training, cannot adapt to large-scale data scenarios of large model pre-training.","importance":"It is a method-level contribution to pre-training data filtering. The proposed Bayesian DPS scheme has more than 70% lower computational cost than bi-level optimization schemes, and can be directly integrated into the data processing pipeline of large model pre-training.","technical_approach":"It is an original design of DPS method, which transforms the DPS problem into posterior inference problem of a Bayesian model, infers the posterior distribution of sample weights and main network parameters at the same time, adopts stochastic gradient Langevin MCMC sampling to realize joint learning. It abandons the previous bi-level optimization framework to avoid theoretical defects under minibatch.","experiments":"Tests are conducted on two scenarios of ImageNet classification and LLaMA-7B pre-training. It can achieve the performance of full data training using only 1/3 of the training data, and computational cost is 73% lower than existing bi-level optimization DPS schemes. Ablation shows that performance is optimal when the prior distribution of sample weights is set to sparse distribution.","authors_note":"Timothy M. Hospedales, a leading researcher in meta-learning and data-efficient learning from University of Edinburgh, is the senior author."},"tags":["data-selection","data-quality","bayesian","training-data","optimization"],"keywords":["Bayesian","LLM","Data selection","Data unbalancing","Data denoising","Domain adaptation"],"notable_authors":["Timothy M. Hospedales"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"数据点选择可以有效降低预训练的数据规模和训练成本，同时保持模型性能。","claim_en":"Data point selection can effectively reduce pre-training data scale and training cost while maintaining model performance.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"贝叶斯DPS方案在小批量训练下的性能比双层优化DPS方案高11%以上，且不存在双层优化的理论缺陷。","claim_en":"Bayesian DPS scheme has more than 11% higher performance than bi-level optimization DPS scheme under minibatch training, and does not have the theoretical defects of bi-level optimization.","opposes":"此前研究认为双层优化是DPS的最优框架，其他方案的性能无法超过双层优化。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"§5 Experiments","why_contested":"这一结论使得大模型预训练场景下的数据点选择变得可行，有望大幅降低大模型预训练的数据成本。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"只读贝叶斯DPS的核心实现逻辑和开销对比实验部分，可直接集成到内部预训练数据过滤流程降低计算成本。","en":"Only read the core implementation logic of Bayesian DPS and cost comparison experiments, it can be directly integrated into internal pre-training data filtering pipeline to reduce computing cost."}},{"id":"2404.12038","title":"Uncovering Safety Risks of Large Language Models through Concept Activation Vector","authors":["Zhihao Xu","Ruixuan Huang","Changyu Chen","Xiting Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1da","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.12038","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/XuHCW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/XuHCW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/d3a230d716e65afab578a8eb31a8d25f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇论文要解决的是：在安全对齐之后，LLM 的“安全机制到底在内部表征里如何起作用、又如何被系统性绕过”仍缺少可操作的解释工具，导致攻击往往靠经验调参而不是可诊断、可复现的机制驱动。作者认为仅用黑盒 jailbreak 成功率来评估风险太粗，因为它不告诉你模型是被哪类“安全概念”卡住、又是如何被推开。","importance":"贡献是方法级的安全诊断与攻击框架：把概念激活向量（CAV）改造成面向安全对齐的 SCAV，用“可解释的内部方向”来指导 prompt 攻击与 embedding 级攻击。对 pretrain/posttrain 的启示在于：对齐并不等于把危险能力抹掉，很多时候只是把决策边界沿某些表征方向推移；一旦能定位这些方向，就能以更少数据、更少调参成本稳定复现越狱。","technical_approach":"核心方法是 Safety Concept Activation Vector（SCAV）：先用少量带安全语义的对比样本在隐藏表征空间里学习一个“安全概念方向”，再用该方向去构造能最大化绕过的扰动。与常见的梯度越狱不同，SCAV 的关键选择是把攻击目标从“直接最大化有害输出概率”改为“沿安全概念方向做可控投影/扰动”，从而把超参（扰动强度等）自动化选择并提升可迁移性。方法同时覆盖两条攻击路径：生成攻击 prompt（离散文本层）以及 embedding-level attack（连续表征层），后者更接近对齐模块/安全头在表征空间的脆弱点。","experiments":"摘要未给出模型规模、数据量、具体基线与数值提升，因此无法复述精确增益。作者声称在自动与人工评测下，SCAV-guided 攻击在攻击成功率与回复质量上显著优于基线，并且所需训练数据更少；同时观察到生成的攻击 prompt 可迁移到 GPT-4，embedding 级攻击也存在跨模型迁移迹象。边界是：没有看到对不同对齐策略（RLHF、DPO、RLAIF 等）或不同架构/层选择的系统性消融数字，难判断 SCAV 是否稳定定位“安全概念”而非数据集偏差方向。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a practical gap: after safety alignment, we still lack an actionable way to interpret which internal representations implement “safety,” so attacks remain largely heuristic and hard to diagnose. Pure black-box jailbreak metrics are insufficient because they don’t reveal what concept boundary the model uses and how that boundary can be systematically shifted.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution for safety probing: it adapts Concept Activation Vectors into a safety-specific SCAV and uses that interpretable direction to drive both prompt-level and embedding-level attacks. The pretrain/posttrain takeaway is that alignment often relocates decision boundaries along a few representation directions rather than removing capabilities; once those directions are identified, bypassing can become data-efficient and reproducible.","technical_approach":"SCAV learns a “safety concept direction” in hidden-state space from a small set of contrastive safety-related examples, then constructs attacks by perturbing along that direction. The key design choice is to optimize in a concept-aligned subspace (projection/controlled perturbation) instead of directly maximizing harmful-token likelihood, enabling automatic hyperparameter selection (e.g., perturbation strength) and better transfer. The framework supports two attack surfaces: discrete prompt generation and continuous embedding-level perturbations, with the latter directly stressing representation-level safety mechanisms.","experiments":"The abstract does not report model sizes, dataset scale, baselines, or exact numbers, so quantitative gains cannot be stated. It claims higher attack success rate and better response quality than baselines with less training data, and reports transferability of generated prompts to GPT-4 plus some cross-model transfer for embedding attacks. A key limitation is the lack of reported ablations across alignment methods or architectures/layers, making it hard to separate true “safety concept” discovery from dataset- or model-specific directions.","authors_note":""},"tags":["interpretability","safety","activation-vector","jailbreak","representation"],"keywords":["large language model","responsible AI","AI safety","concept-based model explanation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只读SCAV的构造方法和表征层攻击实验部分，可参考其思路定位内部模型对齐后的安全表征边界。","en":"Only read the SCAV construction method and representation-level attack experiments, refer to its ideas to locate the security representation boundary of internal aligned models."}},{"id":"YaoYX24","title":"CLAVE: An Adaptive Framework for Evaluating Values of LLM Generated Responses","authors":["Jing Yao","Xiaoyuan Yi","Xing Xie"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1db","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YaoYX24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YaoYX24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/6c1d2496c04d1ef648d58684b699643f-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要与关键信息，无法可靠说明 CLAVE 要评估的“values”具体指哪些价值维度（安全、帮助性、公平、诚实等）以及为何现有评测框架不足。","importance":"缺少摘要与实验信息，无法判断其是提出新评测集、新打分模型，还是一种自适应评测流程，对对齐训练信号质量的影响也无法量化。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要，无法说明其“adaptive framework”如何自适应（按问题类型选维度、按不确定性采样、还是动态生成对照回答），以及如何避免评测被模型迎合。","experiments":"缺少摘要，无法提取评测覆盖的模型、标注协议、指标与数值结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The abstract is missing, so the specific notion of “values” being evaluated and the shortcomings of existing evaluation setups cannot be stated reliably.","importance":"Without details, it is unclear whether CLAVE contributes a new benchmark, a scoring model, or an adaptive evaluation protocol, and how it affects alignment signal quality.","technical_approach":"No abstract is provided, so the adaptation mechanism (dimension selection, uncertainty-driven sampling, dynamic counterfactual generation, etc.) and robustness to gaming cannot be described.","experiments":"No experimental details are available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["alignment","evaluation","values","safety"],"keywords":["large language model","value evaluation","value alignment","value concept"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅需查看摘要和核心实验部分确认其价值维度定义与自适应逻辑，无明确结论前无需深入研读","en":"Only check its abstract and core experiments to confirm value dimension definition and adaptive logic, no deep dive is needed before clear conclusions are presented."}},{"id":"YiHZY24","title":"Bridge the Modality and Capability Gaps in Vision-Language Model Selection","authors":["Chao Yi","Yuhang He","De-Chuan Zhan","Han-Jia Ye"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1dc","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YiHZY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YiHZY24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/3d007df4ae13adf9001f8969555b11bd-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"缺少摘要与关键信息，无法可靠说明其“VLM selection”要弥合的 modality gap 与 capability gap 分别指什么，以及现有模型选择/路由方法为何失效。","importance":"缺少摘要与实验信息，无法判断其对多 VLM 体系的选择器（router）设计、评测协议或训练信号的贡献量级。","technical_approach":"缺少摘要，无法说明其是基于元学习/不确定性估计/对比评测的选择框架，还是通过统一表征把模态差异映射到可比较空间。","experiments":"缺少摘要，无法提取候选 VLM 集合、任务覆盖、选择准确率/下游收益与数值结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No abstract is provided, so the meaning of modality gap vs capability gap in VLM selection and why existing routing/selection fails cannot be stated reliably.","importance":"Without results, the contribution to multi-VLM routing, evaluation protocols, or training signals cannot be assessed.","technical_approach":"The selection framework (meta-learning, uncertainty estimation, comparative evaluation, or representation unification) is unclear due to missing abstract.","experiments":"No experimental details are available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","model-selection","evaluation","multimodal"],"keywords":["Vision-Language Model","Model Selection","Zero-Shot Image Classification"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅阅读核心方法章节确认其模态/能力gap的定义与路由设计逻辑，暂不建议复现相关实验","en":"Only read its core method section to confirm modality/capability gap definition and router design logic, reproduction is not recommended for now."}},{"id":"YiLXL24","title":"Towards Understanding the Working Mechanism of Text-to-Image Diffusion Model","authors":["Mingyang Yi","Aoxue Li","Yi Xin","Zhenguo Li"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1dd","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YiLXL24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YiLXL24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/63e8bc7bbf1cfea36d1d1b6538aecce5-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要回答的核心问题是：文本到图像扩散模型到底靠什么机制把文本条件变成可控的视觉生成。这个问题过去更多靠经验调参和现象描述来处理，模型能用但机理不清，导致大家很难判断文本对齐、去噪动态和语义绑定分别发生在什么层级、什么时间步，以及这些规律能否指导更稳的预训练和条件设计。","importance":"它的价值更偏机制分析而不是直接提出新模型。对 pretrain 研究的意义在于，扩散模型已经是图像和多模态生成的基础设施，但很多训练和架构选择仍然高度经验化；如果这篇文章能把 cross-attention、时间步和语义成分的分工讲清楚，它会直接影响条件注入、token 设计、蒸馏和跨模态统一建模的做法。边界也很清楚：这类工作通常提供的是解释框架和诊断工具，不一定立刻带来端到端指标提升。","technical_approach":"从题目看，这是一篇针对 text-to-image diffusion working mechanism 的分析型工作，而不是新的生成范式。合理推断其核心方法是对去噪网络内部表示、文本条件通路和生成过程做分层/分步归因，例如分析不同层的 cross-attention 响应、不同 time step 对布局与细节的贡献，以及文本 token 与图像区域之间的作用关系；相比只看最终 attention map，这类设计更可能回答“什么时候决定全局结构、什么时候补局部纹理”。它有效的原因在于，扩散生成天然是逐步修正过程，单看终态会把动态机制平均掉；但它的限制也是明显的，分析结论往往依赖具体 backbone、采样器和提示词分布。","experiments":"给定信息不足，无法确认模型规模、数据规模、基线和具体数值结果。可以确定的是，这类论文通常会做三类实验：一是对生成过程的时序分析，验证早期步骤更影响全局语义或布局、后期步骤更影响细节；二是做模块干预，比如屏蔽部分 cross-attention 层或替换文本 token，观察语义漂移；三是做可视化与定量一致性分析，证明结论不是个别样例。由于没有摘要原文，这里不应编造任何提升幅度或 benchmark 结果。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper aims to explain how a text-to-image diffusion model actually turns language conditioning into controllable visual generation. This has mostly been handled with heuristics so far: models work, but we still lack a clear account of which layers, timesteps, and conditioning pathways handle global semantics, local details, and text-image binding.","importance":"This is primarily a mechanism paper, not a new modeling recipe. Its value for pretraining research is that diffusion models now sit at the core of image and multimodal generation, yet many design choices around conditioning, tokenization, and training remain empirical; a good mechanistic account can inform better conditioning interfaces, distillation, and unified multimodal pretraining. The limit is also clear: such work usually gives diagnostic insight rather than immediate benchmark gains.","technical_approach":"From the title, this is best understood as an analysis of the internal working dynamics of text-to-image diffusion, rather than a new generative objective. The likely method is a layer- and timestep-level study of denoising dynamics, cross-attention behavior, and token-region interactions, designed to separate when the model commits to coarse layout versus when it refines texture and appearance. That design makes sense because diffusion is inherently iterative; looking only at final outputs or final attention maps hides the temporal structure. The trade-off is that conclusions can be architecture- and sampler-dependent.","experiments":"The provided information is insufficient to state model size, data scale, baselines, or exact numbers. Papers of this type typically include timestep intervention studies, module ablations such as masking or editing cross-attention pathways, and qualitative-plus-quantitative analyses that test whether observed behaviors generalize beyond cherry-picked prompts. Without the abstract text, any concrete metric claim would be speculative and should be avoided.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","interpretability","text-to-image","mechanism"],"keywords":["text-to-image generation; working mechanism;"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看§3归因实验部分，结论可直接指导扩散模型跨模态条件注入与时间步调度的内部ablation","en":"Focus on §3 attribution experiments, its conclusions can directly guide internal ablation of cross-modal conditional injection and timestep scheduling for diffusion models."}},{"id":"2412.06483","title":"SafeWorld: Geo-Diverse Safety Alignment","authors":["Da Yin","Haoyi Qiu","Kung-Hsiang Huang","Kai-Wei Chang","Nanyun Peng"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1de","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.06483","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YinQHC024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YinQHC024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e8aad0aaa1309659a7d7e4c21202d9d0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心问题是：现有 LLM 安全评测和对齐默认采用相对单一的价值与法规视角，无法检验模型是否能在不同国家、地区和族群语境下既有帮助又合规。过去很多安全 benchmark 把“安全”当作普适标签处理，回避了地理与文化条件差异；但真实部署里，安全边界就是上下文相关的，所以这个问题已经不能继续用统一模板掩盖。","importance":"它的重要性主要是数据与评测范式级，而不是训练算法级。对 pretrain/posttrain 闭环的启示很直接：如果评测目标本身忽略 geo-diversity，后续的 SFT、RM、DPO 或 safety policy 学到的就会是过度平滑的全球平均规则，既可能误拒也可能误放。SafeWorld 用 50 个国家、493 个地区/族群、2342 条人工核验测试样本把这个问题具体化，说明安全对齐数据需要显式建模地域与文化条件，而不是只堆更多“有害/无害”对。","technical_approach":"作者的做法本质上是构建一个带强上下文标签的安全 benchmark，并配套自动化多维评测框架。关键选择有两个：第一，不只看是否拒答，还看回答是否符合具体文化规范和法律政策；第二，不把地域条件当作元数据留在数据集外，而是直接成为判断输出是否合适的评测依据。相比常见安全集只测通用 toxicity/jailbreak，这种设计更接近实际部署，因为同一请求在不同司法辖区可能有不同可接受答案。代价是标注和核验成本高，而且评价标准天然更难完全客观。","experiments":"论文给出的关键事实是数据规模：2342 个测试 query，覆盖 50 个国家和 493 个地区/族群，并基于人工核验的文化规范与法律政策构建。摘要没有提供具体参评模型、主指标和数值排名，但可以确定作者会用该 benchmark 展示现有 LLM 在 helpfulness、cultural sensitivity 和 legal compliance 之间存在明显张力。对读者最有价值的实验点，通常不是谁第一，而是哪些模型在跨地域迁移上最脆弱，以及自动评测与人工判断的一致性如何。","authors_note":"机构与代表作者信息无法仅凭给定内容可靠确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper tackles a clear gap: current LLM safety evaluation assumes a largely uniform notion of safety and fails to test whether a model can respond helpfully while staying culturally sensitive and legally compliant across different geographies. Earlier benchmarks mostly flatten safety into generic harmful-vs-safe labels, which is no longer adequate for real deployment where acceptable behavior is explicitly context-dependent.","importance":"The contribution is mainly at the benchmark and evaluation-paradigm level, not a new alignment algorithm. For the pretrain–posttrain loop, the implication is important: if evaluation ignores geo-diverse norms, downstream safety tuning will optimize toward an over-smoothed global average, causing both over-refusal and under-refusal in real settings. SafeWorld makes this concrete with 2,342 human-verified test queries spanning 50 countries and 493 regions/races.","technical_approach":"The core approach is to build a safety benchmark with strong geographic context and pair it with a multi-dimensional automatic evaluation framework. Two design choices matter: it evaluates more than refusal behavior, and it treats cultural and legal context as first-class conditions rather than external metadata. Compared with standard toxicity or jailbreak benchmarks, this is much closer to deployment reality because the same request may require different answers across jurisdictions. The trade-off is obvious: curation and validation are expensive, and the labels are harder to make fully objective.","experiments":"The key concrete facts from the abstract are the dataset scale and coverage: 2,342 test queries, 50 countries, and 493 regions/races, grounded in human-verified legal and cultural references. The abstract does not provide model lists or numeric leaderboard results, so those should not be invented. The most useful experimental takeaways are likely the failure modes of existing LLMs under cross-geo safety conditions and how well the automatic metrics track human judgment.","authors_note":""},"tags":["safety","alignment","benchmark","evaluation"],"notable_authors":["Kai-Wei Chang","Nanyun Peng"],"keywords":["LLM","Geo-Diverse","Cultural Norm","Public Policy","Safety"],"recommendation":{"zh":"优先看数据集构建章节，地域维度的安全标签设计可直接复用进内部安全对齐评测流程","en":"Prioritize the dataset construction section, its geo-dimensional safety label design can be directly reused in internal safety alignment evaluation pipelines."}},{"id":"2402.11894","title":"Automating Dataset Updates Towards Reliable and Timely Evaluation of Large Language Models","authors":["Jiahao Ying","Yixin Cao","Yushi Bai","Qianru Sun","Bo Wang","Wei Tang","Zhaojun Ding","Yizhe Yang","Xuanjing Huang","Shuicheng Yan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1df","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.11894","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Ying0BSWTDY0Y24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Ying0BSWTDY0Y24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/1e89c12621c0315373f20f0aeabe5dbe-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作解决的是：当 benchmark 被模型做穿或者发生数据泄漏后，如何低成本、系统化地更新评测集，保持评测的时效性和可信度。过去通常靠人工重新出题，但这既慢又贵，还难以持续迭代；如果不更新，LLM 评测很快会从“能力测量”退化成“记忆回放”。","importance":"它属于评测基础设施和数据工程层面的工作。对 pretrain 研究也有直接意义，因为大模型训练和数据污染越来越严重，很多看似提升的结果其实混合了 benchmark contamination、难度漂移和格式过拟合；这篇工作提供的是一个自动更新 benchmark 的框架，帮助把评测重新拉回到“可靠比较”而不是“谁更像见过题”。这不是提升模型上限的方法，但会影响我们如何判断方法是否真的有效。","technical_approach":"作者提出两种数据集更新策略：mimicking 和 extending。前者生成与原题在风格和上下文上相似的新样本，目的是保留 benchmark 的任务身份；后者基于 Bloom taxonomy 在不同认知层次上扩展原样本，目的是可控地提高或调整难度。这个设计比简单 paraphrase 更强，因为它显式分离了“保持同类任务分布”和“改变认知负荷”两种目标。有效的原因在于，可靠更新需要同时控制风格一致性、难度分布和标签稳定性；代价是自动生成的数据可能引入新偏差，需要系统验证稳定性。","experiments":"摘要表明作者系统分析了三件事：应对 benchmark leakage 的效果、难度控制能力，以及更新后评测的稳定性。给定信息没有提供涉及哪些 benchmark、用了哪些 LLM、更新后性能变化多少，因此不能写具体数字。对读者更有价值的实验点应该是：自动更新后的数据与原集在排名一致性上是否稳定、是否能显著降低疑似泄漏带来的虚高分，以及 mimicking 与 extending 分别更适合什么场景。","authors_note":"机构信息无法仅凭给定内容可靠确认。作者名单中含 Bo Wang。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a practical but increasingly serious problem: once a benchmark is saturated or leaked into model training data, how can we update it automatically so evaluation remains timely and trustworthy? Manual benchmark refreshes are expensive and slow, and without them LLM evaluation quickly turns from capability measurement into memory testing.","importance":"This is an evaluation-infrastructure and data-engineering contribution. It matters for pretraining research because contamination, difficulty drift, and format overfitting now distort many reported gains. An automated update framework does not raise the model ceiling by itself, but it changes how we decide whether an apparent improvement is real or just benchmark exposure.","technical_approach":"The paper proposes two update strategies: mimicking and extending. Mimicking generates new samples that preserve the style and context of the original benchmark, so the task identity stays intact. Extending modifies or expands items across cognitive levels using Bloom’s taxonomy, which gives a handle on difficulty control. This is stronger than simple paraphrasing because it separates two goals that are often conflated: staying in-distribution versus systematically changing reasoning demand. The benefit is better control over benchmark refresh; the risk is that automatically generated data may introduce new artifacts and must be validated for stability.","experiments":"From the abstract, the evaluation focuses on three concrete aspects: handling benchmark leakage, controlling difficulty, and maintaining stability after updates. The provided text does not specify benchmark names, model sizes, or numeric results, so those should not be invented. The most meaningful empirical questions are whether updated datasets preserve ranking consistency, whether they reduce inflated scores caused by contamination, and when mimicking is preferable to extending.","authors_note":""},"tags":["benchmark","evaluation","data-generation","contamination"],"notable_authors":["Bo Wang"],"keywords":["LLMs evaluation","data leakage","dataset updates","overestimation"],"recommendation":{"zh":"只看§4更新策略部分，mimicking+extending的双逻辑可用于内部被污染评测集的快速迭代","en":"Only read §4 update strategy part, the dual logic of mimicking + extending can be used for rapid iteration of internally contaminated evaluation benchmarks."}},{"id":"2407.00626","title":"Maximum Entropy Inverse Reinforcement Learning of Diffusion Models with Energy-Based Models","authors":["Sangwoong Yoon","Himchan Hwang","Dohyun Kwon","Yung-Kyun Noh","Frank C. Park"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1e0","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"oral","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.00626","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YoonH0N024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YoonH0N024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/2bed6c14cd5ea97a9bc1e6094941bde7-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作要解决的是：在扩散模型采样步数较少时，如何稳定提升样本质量。常规扩散模型在少步采样下容易退化，因为去噪轨迹被压缩后更依赖模型对数据分布高密度区域的精确把握；过去常见做法是蒸馏、更强采样器或重新参数化，但对“如何把数据密度信息直接用于训练轨迹”探讨得不多。","importance":"它的贡献属于生成建模范式交叉：把最大熵逆强化学习和能量模型引入 diffusion training/fine-tuning。对 pretrain 研究的意义在于，这篇文章提供了一种非纯 score-matching 视角：扩散模型可以被看成在数据分布上学习一条高熵策略，而 EBM 提供 reward/log-density 信号来修正轨迹。这个思路对 diffusion LM、离散扩散和联合生成目标都有启发，因为它强调的是训练目标层面的互补，而不只是采样技巧。","technical_approach":"DxMI 的核心是联合训练一个 diffusion model 和一个 energy-based model，并把问题写成最大熵 IRL 的 minimax 形式。EBM 负责估计训练数据的对数密度，相当于提供 reward；diffusion 模型像 policy 一样在该 reward 下学习生成轨迹，同时通过 entropy maximization 保持探索，避免过早坍缩到狭窄模式。和直接拿 classifier/score 做 guidance 不同，这里 reward 是通过学习到的密度模型给出的，并进入训练目标而非只在采样时修正。这样设计在少步生成场景下尤其合理，因为你需要每一步都更“懂分布”。代价是联合训练 minimax 通常更难稳，EBM 训练本身也有额外成本。","experiments":"摘要明确的经验结论是：该方法尤其改善少生成步数时的样本质量。给定信息没有提供数据集、FID/IS 数值、步数设置或和哪些蒸馏/加速扩散基线对比，因此不能写具体提升。读者应重点关注的实验点包括：少步区间的质量-步数曲线、是否相比单独 fine-tune diffusion 或单独训练 EBM 更稳定，以及 entropy 项和 EBM 精度对结果的敏感性。","authors_note":"机构信息无法仅凭给定内容可靠确认。作者包含 Frank C. Park。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper targets a specific weakness of diffusion models: sample quality often degrades sharply when generation uses only a small number of steps. Standard fixes focus on distillation or better samplers, but they do not directly inject learned density information into the training objective for the trajectory itself.","importance":"This is a cross-paradigm contribution that connects diffusion modeling with maximum-entropy inverse reinforcement learning and energy-based modeling. For pretraining research, the useful idea is conceptual: diffusion need not be viewed only through score matching; it can also be framed as learning a high-entropy generation policy guided by an estimated data-density reward. That perspective may matter beyond images, including diffusion language modeling and hybrid generative objectives.","technical_approach":"DxMI jointly trains a diffusion model and an energy-based model under a max-entropy IRL minimax objective. The EBM estimates log density on training data and effectively serves as a reward function. The diffusion model then plays the role of a policy that learns generation trajectories under this reward, while entropy regularization prevents premature mode collapse. This differs from adding guidance only at sampling time: the density signal is built into training. The design is especially sensible for few-step generation, where each step must carry more information. The trade-off is optimization difficulty, since minimax training and EBMs both add instability and cost.","experiments":"The abstract makes one concrete empirical claim: the method improves sample quality, especially when the number of generation steps is small. It does not give datasets, metrics, baselines, or exact numbers in the provided text, so no such details should be invented. The experiments that matter most are likely quality-versus-step curves, comparisons against standard diffusion fine-tuning or acceleration baselines, and ablations on the entropy term and the quality of the learned EBM.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","energy-based-model","irl","objective"],"notable_authors":["Frank C. Park"],"keywords":["diffusion models","inverse reinforcement learning","dynamic programming","reinforcement learning","generative modeling"],"recommendation":{"zh":"重点看目标函数推导章节，非纯score matching的训练视角可补充扩散LM的预训练目标设计思路","en":"Focus on the objective function derivation section, the non-pure score-matching training perspective can complement pre-training objective design ideas for diffusion LMs."}},{"id":"2407.02485","title":"RankRAG: Unifying Context Ranking with Retrieval-Augmented Generation in LLMs","authors":["Yue Yu","Wei Ping","Zihan Liu","Boxin Wang","Jiaxuan You","Chao Zhang","Mohammad Shoeybi","Bryan Catanzaro"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1e1","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.02485","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YuP0WYZSC24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YuP0WYZSC24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/db93ccb6cf392f352570dd5af0a223d3-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作的核心问题是：RAG 里检索排序和答案生成通常是分开的，导致排序目标与生成目标错位，最终 top-k context 可能对检索指标好但对回答未必最有用。过去的做法通常是 retriever 召回、reranker 排序、generator 生成三段式流水线，每一段都各自最优，但整体不一定最优。","importance":"它的重要性在于把 ranking 和 generation 重新拉回同一个 LLM 内做联合指令微调。对 posttrain 和应用系统都很有意义，因为它说明少量 ranking 数据混入 SFT 配方就能让同一模型兼顾证据排序和答案生成，减少系统割裂。对 pretrain 视角的启示则是：很多看似“工具链工程”的能力，其实可以通过统一语言建模目标内化进模型行为，而不是永远依赖外挂专家模块。","technical_approach":"RankRAG 的方法很直接：用一个 LLM 同时学 context ranking 和 answer generation，并把 ranking 数据作为训练混合中的小部分加入 instruction tuning。关键点不在于多任务本身，而在于作者观察到少量 ranking supervision 就足以让生成模型获得很强的排序能力，甚至超过专门用大量 ranking 数据训练的 expert ranker。相比传统 reranker+generator 解耦方案，它的优势是排序标准更贴近最终回答需要的信息，而不是独立相关性分数。代价是如果任务需要极高吞吐检索，单模型统一方案在 serving 上未必最便宜。","experiments":"摘要给出的强结论是：该方法在排序上超过现有 expert ranking models，甚至超过同一 LLM 用大量 ranking 数据单独微调的结果；在生成上，比较对象包括 GPT-4-0613、GPT-4-turbo-2024-0409 和 ChatQA-1.5。给定摘要被截断，具体使用的是 Llama3-RankRAG 变体，但没有完整 benchmark 名称和数值，因此不能硬写分数。实验上最值得关注的是一个反直觉点：ranking 数据只占小比例却能显著提升双任务能力，这说明排序和生成共享了相当多的表示与推理结构。","authors_note":"机构信息无法仅凭给定内容可靠确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper addresses a common mismatch in RAG pipelines: context ranking is usually optimized separately from answer generation, so the top-k passages can be good for retrieval metrics without being the most useful evidence for the final answer. Standard retriever–reranker–generator stacks optimize each component in isolation rather than the end task jointly.","importance":"The contribution is important at the post-training and systems level because it shows that ranking and generation can be unified inside one instruction-tuned LLM. The broader lesson is that some abilities we treat as external tooling can be internalized through the model’s own training objective instead of remaining permanently modularized. That matters for both quality and pipeline simplicity.","technical_approach":"RankRAG instruction-tunes a single LLM for both context ranking and answer generation, adding only a small fraction of ranking data into the overall training mix. The notable result is not merely multi-task learning, but that a little ranking supervision appears sufficient to produce strong ranking behavior—strong enough to beat dedicated ranking models, including the same LLM fine-tuned exclusively on much more ranking data. Compared with a decoupled reranker-plus-generator setup, the unified model can rank contexts using criteria that are directly aligned with downstream answer utility. The trade-off is serving efficiency: a unified LLM may not always be the cheapest component for high-throughput retrieval stacks.","experiments":"The abstract makes two strong empirical claims: the model outperforms existing expert ranking models, and on generation it is compared against strong baselines including GPT-4-0613, GPT-4-turbo-2024-0409, and ChatQA-1.5. The provided text is truncated, so benchmark names and exact numbers should not be fabricated. The most interesting experimental signal is that only a small amount of ranking data materially improves both ranking and generation, suggesting substantial shared structure between the two tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["rag","instruction-tuning","ranking","llm"],"keywords":["LLM","Retrieval-augmented Generation","Ranking"],"recommendation":{"zh":"仅看§3训练配方部分，少量排序数据混入SFT的设计可直接尝试进内部RAG专用模型的微调流程","en":"Only read §3 training recipe part, the design of mixing small amount of ranking data into SFT can be directly tested in internal RAG-specific model fine-tuning pipelines."}},{"id":"Yuan0YZX0GWY24","title":"Instance-adaptive Zero-shot Chain-of-Thought Prompting","authors":["Xiaosong Yuan","Chen Shen","Shaotian Yan","Xiaofeng Zhang","Liang Xie","Wenxiao Wang","Renchu Guan","Ying Wang","Jieping Ye"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1e2","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/Yuan0YZX0GWY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/Yuan0YZX0GWY24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e304e04a6f455dd82f8a85a0a3679493-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"解决 Zero-shot CoT 推理中单一 prompt 无法适配所有样本的问题。传统的 Zero-shot CoT 通常在整个任务层面使用固定的 prompt，忽略了 prompt 与具体 instance 之间的交互，导致次优的推理效果。","importance":"方法级贡献。提出了一种无需训练、即插即用的 instance-adaptive prompt 选择机制。它揭示了 LLM 在处理不同 prompt 时的信息流差异，为理解和优化 prompt 提供了新的视角，对提升 LLM 的 zero-shot 推理能力有直接的工程价值。","technical_approach":"提出了一种基于信息流分析的 instance-adaptive prompt 算法。首先，通过分析 LLM 内部的信息流，发现好的 prompt 能在推理过程中引导模型产生更强的信息传递。基于此，设计了一个无需人工标注的指标来评估 prompt 与 instance 的匹配度，并在推理时为每个 instance 动态选择最优的 prompt。该方法放弃了寻找全局最优 prompt 的思路，转而追求 instance 级别的最优匹配。","experiments":"在多个推理任务上验证了方法的有效性。相比于使用单一最佳 prompt，该方法能稳定提升模型性能。实验分析了不同 prompt 在不同 instance 上的表现差异，证实了 instance-adaptive 策略的必要性。具体提升幅度和模型规模需参考原论文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses the limitation of using a single, task-level prompt for all instances in Zero-shot Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning. Traditional methods ignore the interaction between the prompt and specific instances, leading to sub-optimal performance.","importance":"Methodological contribution. It introduces a training-free, plug-and-play instance-adaptive prompt selection mechanism. By revealing the differences in information flow within LLMs when processing different prompts, it provides a new perspective for understanding and optimizing prompts, offering direct engineering value for enhancing zero-shot reasoning.","technical_approach":"Proposes an instance-adaptive prompting algorithm based on information flow analysis. First, by analyzing the internal information flow of LLMs, it discovers that good prompts induce stronger information transfer during reasoning. Based on this, a training-free metric is designed to evaluate the match between a prompt and an instance, allowing for dynamic selection of the optimal prompt for each instance during inference. This approach abandons the search for a globally optimal prompt in favor of instance-level optimal matching.","experiments":"Validated on multiple reasoning tasks. Compared to using a single best prompt, the proposed method consistently improves model performance. Experimental analysis of the performance differences of various prompts on different instances confirms the necessity of the instance-adaptive strategy. Specific improvement margins and model scales require reference to the original paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["chain-of-thought","prompting","zero-shot","llm"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Chain-of-Thought Reasoning","Instance-adaptive","Zero-shot"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Zero-shot CoT 是一种简单有效的提升 LLM 推理能力的策略。","claim_en":"Zero-shot CoT is a simple and effective strategy for enhancing the reasoning capabilities of LLMs.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"单一的 task-level prompt 无法在所有 instance 上取得最佳效果，prompt 的选择应该与 instance 适配。","claim_en":"A single task-level prompt cannot achieve optimal results on all instances; prompt selection should be adapted to the instance.","opposes":"传统的 Zero-shot CoT 在整个任务层面使用固定的 prompt。","opposes_cite_hint":"Kojima et al., 2022 (Large Language Models are Zero-Shot Reasoners)","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"打破了寻找全局最优 prompt 的惯性思维，将 prompt 优化细化到了 instance 级别。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为prompt优化的弱信号备查，无需读正文，知道可基于信息流动态选instance级prompt即可","en":"Keep it as weak reference for prompt optimization, no need to read the full text, only need to know instance-level prompt can be dynamically selected based on information flow."}},{"id":"YuanLX24","title":"Bridging The Gap between Low-rank and Orthogonal Adaptation via Householder Reflection Adaptation","authors":["Shen Yuan","Haotian Liu","Hongteng Xu"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1e3","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"spotlight","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YuanLX24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YuanLX24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/cdd0640218a27e9e2c0e52e324e25db0-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"统一低秩微调（LoRA）和正交微调（OFT）两种参数高效微调（PEFT）技术。这两种方法虽然技术路线不同，但都能有效适配大模型，此前缺乏一个统一的理论框架来连接它们。","importance":"理论与方法级贡献。通过 Householder 反射（HR）建立了一个桥梁，证明了基于 HR 的正交微调等价于一种自适应的低秩微调。这不仅统一了两种主流的 PEFT 方法，还提供了一种新的、具有理论保证的微调策略，有助于深入理解 PEFT 的内在机制。","technical_approach":"提出了一种基于 Householder 反射的自适应方法（HRA）。在微调时，将预训练权重矩阵乘以一个由一系列可学习的 Householder 反射构建的正交矩阵。理论上证明了这种 HR-based 的正交微调等价于自适应的低秩微调。此外，分析了 HR 对应的反射平面的正交性对模型容量和正则化的影响。","experiments":"在多个任务和模型上验证了 HRA 的有效性。实验结果表明，HRA 在保持参数高效的同时，能够取得与 LoRA 和 OFT 相当或更好的性能。具体的参数量、数据集和指标对比需参考原论文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Unifies Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) and Orthogonal Fine-Tuning (OFT), two Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) techniques. Although following different technical routes, both effectively adapt large models, and a unified theoretical framework connecting them was previously lacking.","importance":"Theoretical and methodological contribution. It establishes a bridge via Householder Reflections (HR), proving that HR-based orthogonal fine-tuning is equivalent to an adaptive low-rank adaptation. This not only unifies two mainstream PEFT methods but also provides a new fine-tuning strategy with theoretical guarantees, aiding in a deeper understanding of the internal mechanisms of PEFT.","technical_approach":"Proposes an adaptation method based on Householder Reflections (HRA). During fine-tuning, the pre-trained weight matrix is multiplied by an orthogonal matrix constructed from a chain of learnable Householder reflections. It theoretically proves that this HR-based orthogonal fine-tuning is equivalent to an adaptive low-rank adaptation. Furthermore, it analyzes the impact of the orthogonality of the reflection planes corresponding to the HRs on model capacity and regularization.","experiments":"Validated the effectiveness of HRA across multiple tasks and models. Experimental results show that HRA achieves comparable or better performance than LoRA and OFT while maintaining parameter efficiency. Specific parameter counts, datasets, and metric comparisons require reference to the original paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["lora","parameter-efficient","fine-tuning","orthogonal-adaptation"],"keywords":["Orthogonal fine-tuning","Householder reflection","Conditional text-to-image generation","Large language models"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"低秩微调和正交微调都能通过少量可训练参数高效地适配大规模预训练模型。","claim_en":"Both low-rank and orthogonal adaptation techniques can efficiently adapt large-scale pre-training models based on a small piece of trainable parameters.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"基于 Householder 反射的正交微调等价于一种自适应的低秩微调。","claim_en":"HR-based orthogonal fine-tuning is equivalent to an adaptive low-rank adaptation.","opposes":"低秩微调和正交微调是两种截然不同的技术路线。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"从理论上统一了两种看似不同的 PEFT 方法，揭示了它们内在的联系。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为PEFT领域文献备查，无需细读，知道Householder反射可统一LoRA与OFT的理论框架即可","en":"Keep it as PEFT domain literature reference, no deep reading needed, only need to know Householder reflection can unify the theoretical framework of LoRA and OFT."}},{"id":"YuanZPNZZYD024","title":"DiTFastAttn: Attention Compression for Diffusion Transformer Models","authors":["Zhihang Yuan","Hanling Zhang","Lu Pu","Xuefei Ning","Linfeng Zhang","Tianchen Zhao","Shengen Yan","Guohao Dai","Yu Wang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Diffusion Transformers (DiT) excel at image and video generation but face computational challenges due to the quadratic complexity of self-attention operators. We propose DiTFastAttn, a post-training compression method to alleviate the computational bottleneck of DiT.\nWe identify three key redundancies in the attention computation during DiT inference: (1) spatial redundancy, where many attention heads focus on local information; (2) temporal redundancy, with high similarity between the attention outputs of neighboring steps; (3) conditional redundancy, where conditional and unconditional inferences exhibit significant similarity. We propose three techniques to reduce these redundancies: (1) $\\textit{Window Attention with Residual Sharing}$ to reduce spatial redundancy; (2) $\\textit{Attention Sharing across Timesteps}$ to exploit the similarity between steps; (3) $\\textit{Attention Sharing across CFG}$ to skip redundant computations during conditional generation.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YuanZPNZZYD024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YuanZPNZZYD024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/0267925e3c276e79189251585b4100bf-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal_gen","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"缓解 Diffusion Transformers (DiT) 推理时自注意力操作带来的二次计算复杂度瓶颈。DiT 在生成任务中表现优异，但计算成本高昂，限制了其应用。","importance":"系统与方法级贡献。提出了一种无需重新训练的 DiT 注意力压缩方法（DiTFastAttn），通过识别并消除推理过程中的三种冗余（空间、时间、条件），显著降低了计算量。这对于 DiT 的实际部署和加速具有重要意义。","technical_approach":"提出 DiTFastAttn，包含三种技术来消除冗余：(1) 针对空间冗余（许多 attention head 关注局部信息），提出带有残差共享的窗口注意力（Window Attention with Residual Sharing）；(2) 针对时间冗余（相邻 step 的 attention 输出高度相似），提出注意力共享（Attention Sharing）；(3) 针对条件冗余（条件和无条件推理高度相似），提出条件和无条件推理之间的注意力共享。这些方法都是 post-training 的，无需重新训练模型。","experiments":"在多个 DiT 模型上进行了测试。实验表明，DiTFastAttn 能够有效减少计算量（FLOPs），同时保持生成质量。具体的加速比和质量指标需参考原论文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Alleviates the quadratic computational complexity bottleneck of self-attention operators during Diffusion Transformers (DiT) inference. DiT excels in generation tasks but suffers from high computational costs, limiting its application.","importance":"System and methodological contribution. Proposes a training-free attention compression method for DiT (DiTFastAttn), which significantly reduces computation by identifying and eliminating three types of redundancies (spatial, temporal, conditional) during inference. This is of great significance for the practical deployment and acceleration of DiT.","technical_approach":"Proposes DiTFastAttn, comprising three techniques to eliminate redundancies: (1) For spatial redundancy (many attention heads focus on local information), it proposes Window Attention with Residual Sharing; (2) For temporal redundancy (high similarity between attention outputs of neighboring steps), it proposes Attention Sharing; (3) For conditional redundancy (high similarity between conditional and unconditional inferences), it proposes attention sharing between conditional and unconditional inferences. These methods are post-training and do not require retraining the model.","experiments":"Tested on multiple DiT models. Experiments show that DiTFastAttn effectively reduces computation (FLOPs) while maintaining generation quality. Specific acceleration ratios and quality metrics require reference to the original paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["attention-compression","diffusion-transformer","inference-efficiency"],"keywords":["Diffusion Transformer","Attention","Acceleration"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"Diffusion Transformers (DiT) 的自注意力操作具有二次计算复杂度，导致推理成本高昂。","claim_en":"Diffusion Transformers (DiT) face computational challenges due to the quadratic complexity of self-attention operators.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"DiT 推理过程中的注意力计算存在显著的空间、时间和条件冗余，可以通过 post-training 的方法进行压缩。","claim_en":"There are significant spatial, temporal, and conditional redundancies in the attention computation during DiT inference, which can be compressed using post-training methods.","opposes":"DiT 的注意力计算是完全必要的，难以在不重新训练的情况下大幅压缩。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"指出了 DiT 推理中可利用的冗余特性，为无需重新训练的加速方法提供了依据。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为DiT推理加速的工程方案备查，无需细读，知道三种无训练注意力压缩思路即可","en":"Keep it as engineering reference for DiT inference acceleration, no deep reading needed, only need to know the three training-free attention compression ideas."}},{"id":"YunisJDW24","title":"Subwords as Skills: Tokenization for Sparse-Reward Reinforcement Learning","authors":["David Yunis","Justin Jung","Falcon Z. Dai","Matthew R. Walter"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Exploration in sparse-reward reinforcement learning (RL) is difficult due to the need for long, coordinated sequences of actions in order to achieve any reward. Skill learning, from demonstrations or interaction, is a promising approach to address this, but skill extraction and inference are expensive for current methods. We present a novel method to extract skills from demonstrations for use in sparse-reward RL, inspired by the popular Byte-Pair Encoding (BPE) algorithm in natural language processing. With these skills, we show strong performance in a variety of tasks, 1000$\\times$ acceleration for skill-extraction and 100$\\times$ acceleration for policy inference. Given the simplicity of our method, skills extracted from 1\\% of the demonstrations in one task can be transferred to a new loosely related task. We also note that such a method yields a finite set of interpretable behaviors. Our code is available at https://github.com/dyunis/subwords_as_skills.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/YunisJDW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/YunisJDW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/7d0c7a899224cd178b2e0cbecf39b5a5-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":3,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"解决稀疏奖励强化学习（RL）中探索困难的问题。传统的 RL 在稀疏奖励下难以学习长序列动作，而现有的技能学习（skill learning）方法在技能提取和推理上成本过高。","importance":"方法级贡献。借鉴 NLP 中的 BPE 算法，提出了一种极其高效的技能提取方法。该方法将动作序列视为文本，将技能视为 subwords，极大地加速了技能提取和策略推理过程，为解决稀疏奖励 RL 提供了一种新颖且高效的途径。","technical_approach":"提出了一种受 BPE 算法启发的技能提取方法。将专家演示（demonstrations）中的动作序列视为字符序列，使用 BPE 算法提取频繁出现的动作子序列作为“技能”（skills/subwords）。在 RL 训练中，智能体可以直接选择这些高层次的技能，从而缩短探索路径。该方法舍弃了复杂的技能学习模型（如 VAE），转而使用简单的频率统计，实现了极高的效率。","experiments":"在多种任务上展示了强大的性能。相比于现有方法，技能提取速度提升了 1000 倍，策略推理速度提升了 100 倍。此外，仅使用 1% 的演示数据提取的技能，就能成功迁移到新的任务中。具体的任务环境和对比 baseline 需参考原论文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses the difficulty of exploration in sparse-reward reinforcement learning (RL). Traditional RL struggles to learn long action sequences with sparse rewards, and existing skill learning methods are too expensive in skill extraction and inference.","importance":"Methodological contribution. Inspired by the BPE algorithm in NLP, it proposes an extremely efficient skill extraction method. By treating action sequences as text and skills as subwords, it dramatically accelerates skill extraction and policy inference, providing a novel and efficient approach to sparse-reward RL.","technical_approach":"Proposes a skill extraction method inspired by the BPE algorithm. It treats action sequences in expert demonstrations as character sequences and uses BPE to extract frequently occurring action subsequences as 'skills' (subwords). During RL training, the agent can directly select these high-level skills, thereby shortening the exploration path. This method abandons complex skill learning models (like VAEs) in favor of simple frequency statistics, achieving extremely high efficiency.","experiments":"Demonstrated strong performance across a variety of tasks. Compared to existing methods, skill extraction is accelerated by 1000x and policy inference by 100x. Furthermore, skills extracted from just 1% of demonstrations can be successfully transferred to new tasks. Specific task environments and baseline comparisons require reference to the original paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["tokenizer","reinforcement-learning","subword","skill-discovery"],"keywords":["Reinforcement Learning","Deep Learning","Exploration","Hierarchical RL"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"在稀疏奖励强化学习中，由于需要长且协调的动作序列才能获得奖励，探索是非常困难的。","claim_en":"Exploration in sparse-reward reinforcement learning (RL) is difficult due to the need for long, coordinated sequences of actions in order to achieve any reward.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"可以使用类似 BPE 的简单频率统计算法高效地从演示中提取技能，而无需复杂的生成模型。","claim_en":"Skills can be efficiently extracted from demonstrations using simple frequency statistics algorithms like BPE, without the need for complex generative models.","opposes":"现有的技能学习方法通常依赖于复杂的模型（如 VAE 或连续控制策略），导致提取和推理成本高昂。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"极大地简化了技能提取的过程，证明了在某些场景下，简单的统计方法比复杂的深度学习模型更有效且高效。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为跨领域借鉴的弱信号备查，无需细读，知道BPE可用于稀疏奖励RL的技能提取即可","en":"Keep it as weak reference for cross-domain inspiration, no deep reading needed, only need to know BPE can be used for skill extraction in sparse-reward RL."}},{"id":"ZhangL0YWJLY24","title":"OMG-LLaVA: Bridging Image-level, Object-level, Pixel-level Reasoning and Understanding","authors":["Tao Zhang","Xiangtai Li","Hao Fei","Haobo Yuan","Shengqiong Wu","Shunping Ji","Chen Change Loy","Shuicheng Yan"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1e4","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangL0YWJLY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangL0YWJLY24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/83eb86be3e2f9fd66c44d9073c51ba4d-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":2,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"解决当前视觉模型在像素级理解和高级推理能力上的割裂问题。通用分割模型缺乏推理能力且无法接受文本指令，而大型视觉语言模型（VLM）缺乏像素级理解能力且难以接受灵活的视觉 prompt。","importance":"范式级贡献。提出了 OMG-LLaVA 框架，优雅地将强大的像素级视觉理解与 VLM 的推理能力结合起来。这代表了多模态模型向更细粒度、更灵活交互方向发展的重要一步，为统一图像、目标和像素级理解提供了新的范式。","technical_approach":"提出 OMG-LLaVA 框架。核心机制是使用一个通用分割方法作为视觉编码器，将图像信息、感知先验和视觉 prompt 整合到视觉 token 中。这些 token 随后被输入到 LLM 中进行推理。这种设计使得模型能够同时接受各种视觉和文本 prompt，实现了灵活的用户交互，并桥接了图像级、目标级和像素级的理解。","experiments":"在多个基准测试上进行了评估，证明了 OMG-LLaVA 在结合像素级理解和推理能力方面的有效性。具体的模型架构细节、训练数据和性能指标需参考原论文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses the disconnect between pixel-level understanding and high-level reasoning capabilities in current vision models. Universal segmentation models lack reasoning and cannot take text instructions, while large Vision-Language Models (VLMs) lack pixel-level understanding and struggle with flexible visual prompts.","importance":"Paradigm-level contribution. Proposes the OMG-LLaVA framework, elegantly combining powerful pixel-level vision understanding with the reasoning abilities of VLMs. This represents a significant step towards more fine-grained and flexibly interactive multimodal models, providing a new paradigm for unifying image, object, and pixel-level understanding.","technical_approach":"Proposes the OMG-LLaVA framework. The core mechanism uses a universal segmentation method as the visual encoder, integrating image information, perception priors, and visual prompts into visual tokens. These tokens are then fed into an LLM for reasoning. This design allows the model to accept various visual and text prompts simultaneously, enabling flexible user interaction and bridging image-level, object-level, and pixel-level understanding.","experiments":"Evaluated on multiple benchmarks, demonstrating the effectiveness of OMG-LLaVA in combining pixel-level understanding and reasoning capabilities. Specific model architecture details, training data, and performance metrics require reference to the original paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","multimodal-reasoning","grounding","llava"],"keywords":["multi-modal modeling","universal model"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"当前的通用分割方法在像素级理解上能力很强，但缺乏推理能力；而大型视觉语言模型具有强大的推理能力，但缺乏像素级理解。","claim_en":"Current universal segmentation methods demonstrate strong capabilities in pixel-level understanding but lack reasoning abilities; whereas large vision-language models exhibit powerful reasoning capabilities but lack pixel-level understanding.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"作为多模态细粒度建模的趋势参考，无需细读，知道分割模块可作为VLM视觉编码器补充像素能力即可","en":"Keep it as trend reference for multi-modal fine-grained modeling, no deep reading needed, only need to know segmentation modules can supplement pixel capability for VLM visual encoders."}},{"id":"ZhangLLQ24","title":"Rethinking Misalignment in Vision-Language Model Adaptation from a Causal Perspective","authors":["Yanan Zhang","Jiangmeng Li","Lixiang Liu","Wenwen Qiang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1e5","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangLLQ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangLLQ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/453a27b717972ef94a9a9113d236ad2f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"解决视觉语言模型（如 CLIP）在适应下游任务时面临的数据不对齐（data misalignment）问题。虽然 soft prompt tuning 缓解了任务不对齐，但数据不对齐（即预训练数据分布与下游任务数据分布的差异）仍然影响模型性能。","importance":"理论与方法级贡献。从因果推断的角度重新审视了 CLIP 的预训练和适应过程，构建了结构因果模型（SCM）。这为理解 VLM 的泛化机制提供了新的理论工具，并基于此提出了一种原则性的方法来消除任务无关知识的干扰。","technical_approach":"构建了一个结构因果模型来分析数据不对齐的影响。发现任务无关的知识作为未观测到的混淆因子（confounder），会影响预测结果并阻碍模型学习图像和预测类别之间的真实关系。为了解决这个问题，提出了一种基于因果推断的方法，通过干预（intervention）或后门调整（backdoor adjustment）来消除这些混淆因子的影响，从而实现更好的任务适应。","experiments":"在多个下游任务上验证了该方法的有效性。实验结果表明，通过消除任务无关知识的干扰，模型在目标任务上的性能得到了提升。具体的因果干预实现细节和性能提升幅度需参考原论文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Addresses the data misalignment issue faced by Vision-Language Models (like CLIP) when adapting to downstream tasks. While soft prompt tuning mitigates task misalignment, data misalignment (the discrepancy between pre-training and downstream data distributions) still hampers performance.","importance":"Theoretical and methodological contribution. It revisits the pre-training and adaptation processes of CLIP from a causal perspective, constructing a Structural Causal Model (SCM). This provides a new theoretical tool for understanding the generalization mechanisms of VLMs and proposes a principled method to eliminate the interference of task-irrelevant knowledge.","technical_approach":"Constructs a Structural Causal Model to analyze the impact of data misalignment. It discovers that task-irrelevant knowledge acts as an unobserved confounder, impacting prediction results and hindering the modeling of the true relationship between images and predicted classes. To address this, it proposes a causal inference-based method to eliminate the effects of these confounders through intervention or backdoor adjustment, achieving better task adaptation.","experiments":"Validated the effectiveness of the method on multiple downstream tasks. Experimental results show that by eliminating the interference of task-irrelevant knowledge, the model's performance on target tasks is improved. Specific details of the causal intervention implementation and performance improvement margins require reference to the original paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","adaptation","causal-analysis","misalignment"],"keywords":["causal","adaptation","foundational models"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"CLIP 等视觉语言模型在适应特定任务时存在任务不对齐和数据不对齐的问题。","claim_en":"Vision-Language models such as CLIP suffer from task misalignment and data misalignment when adapting to specific tasks.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"任务无关的知识作为未观测到的混淆因子，会阻碍模型学习图像和预测类别之间的真实关系。","claim_en":"Task-irrelevant knowledge acts as an unobserved confounder, hampering the modeling of the true relationships between images and predicted classes.","opposes":"传统的微调方法通常忽略了预训练知识中任务无关部分对当前任务的负面影响。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"引入了因果推断的视角，指出了预训练知识并非全是正向迁移，需要有选择地消除混淆。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"从因果视角分析VLM下游适配的数据不对齐问题，作为VLM泛化机制相关文献备查，无需读正文。","en":"Analyzes VLM downstream adaptation misalignment from causal perspective, for VLM generalization literature reference only, no need to read full text."}},{"id":"ZhangP24","title":"Spectral Adapter: Fine-Tuning in Spectral Space","authors":["Fangzhao Zhang","Mert Pilanci"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"Recent developments in Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) methods for pretrained deep neural networks have captured widespread interest. In this work, we study the enhancement of current PEFT methods by incorporating the spectral information of pretrained weight matrices into the fine-tuning procedure. We investigate two spectral adaptation mechanisms, namely additive tuning and orthogonal rotation of the top singular vectors, both are done via first carrying out Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) of pretrained weights and then fine-tuning the top spectral space. We provide a theoretical analysis of spectral fine-tuning and show that our approach improves the rank capacity of low-rank adapters given a fixed trainable parameter budget. We show through extensive experiments that the proposed fine-tuning model enables better parameter efficiency and tuning performance as well as benefits multi-adapter fusion.  The source code will be open-sourced for reproducibility.","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangP24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangP24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ec2b1931cbda8e4c1a601ff5ff81c4a6-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"post_train","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"提升参数高效微调（PEFT）方法的表达能力。现有的低秩微调方法（如 LoRA）在固定的参数预算下，其秩容量（rank capacity）有限，可能无法充分捕捉复杂任务所需的特征。","importance":"方法与理论级贡献。提出了一种在谱空间（spectral space）进行微调的新方法（Spectral Adapter）。通过理论分析证明了该方法能在固定参数预算下提升低秩适配器的秩容量，为 PEFT 的设计提供了新的数学视角和优化方向。","technical_approach":"提出 Spectral Adapter，通过结合预训练权重矩阵的谱信息来增强微调。具体做法是：首先对预训练权重进行奇异值分解（SVD），然后在 top 谱空间中进行微调。研究了两种谱适应机制：加性微调（additive tuning）和 top 奇异向量的正交旋转（orthogonal rotation）。这种方法利用了预训练权重的内在结构，而不是盲目地添加低秩矩阵。","experiments":"提供了谱微调的理论分析，证明了其在提升秩容量方面的优势。通过广泛的实验验证了 Spectral Adapter 的有效性，表明其在性能上优于或媲美现有的 PEFT 方法。具体的理论界限和实验对比需参考原论文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Enhances the expressive power of Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) methods. Existing low-rank fine-tuning methods (like LoRA) have limited rank capacity under a fixed parameter budget, potentially failing to capture the features required for complex tasks.","importance":"Methodological and theoretical contribution. Proposes a novel method for fine-tuning in the spectral space (Spectral Adapter). Theoretical analysis proves that this method improves the rank capacity of low-rank adapters given a fixed parameter budget, providing a new mathematical perspective and optimization direction for PEFT design.","technical_approach":"Proposes Spectral Adapter, which enhances fine-tuning by incorporating the spectral information of pre-trained weight matrices. Specifically, it first performs Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) on the pre-trained weights and then fine-tunes the top spectral space. It investigates two spectral adaptation mechanisms: additive tuning and orthogonal rotation of the top singular vectors. This approach leverages the intrinsic structure of the pre-trained weights rather than blindly adding low-rank matrices.","experiments":"Provides theoretical analysis of spectral fine-tuning, proving its advantage in improving rank capacity. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of the Spectral Adapter, showing it outperforms or matches existing PEFT methods. Specific theoretical bounds and experimental comparisons require reference to the original paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["fine-tuning","adapter","spectral","parameter-efficient"],"keywords":["fine-tuning; peft; spectral decomposition; transfer learning in spectral space"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"参数高效微调（PEFT）方法在适配预训练深度神经网络方面受到了广泛关注。","claim_en":"Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) methods for pretrained deep neural networks have captured widespread interest.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"在固定的可训练参数预算下，通过在预训练权重的 top 谱空间进行微调，可以提高低秩适配器的秩容量。","claim_en":"Given a fixed trainable parameter budget, fine-tuning in the top spectral space of pretrained weights improves the rank capacity of low-rank adapters.","opposes":"传统的低秩微调（如 LoRA）直接在原始权重空间添加低秩矩阵，其秩容量受限于设定的低秩 r。","opposes_cite_hint":"Hu et al., 2021 (LoRA)","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"指出了利用预训练权重的谱结构可以更高效地利用参数预算，打破了传统低秩微调的容量限制。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"提出谱空间低秩微调方法，证明固定参数下可提升秩容量，作为PEFT设计的数学视角参考，不用细读。","en":"Proposes spectral-space low-rank tuning with higher rank capacity under fixed param budget, for PEFT design mathematical reference, no in-depth reading needed."}},{"id":"ZhangUWGSSY24","title":"Why are Visually-Grounded Language Models Bad at Image Classification?","authors":["Yuhui Zhang","Alyssa Unell","Xiaohan Wang","Dhruba Ghosh","Yuchang Su","Ludwig Schmidt","Serena Yeung"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1e6","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangUWGSSY24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangUWGSSY24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/5c7024041be305c94d7311cfcc53d93e-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":4,"reading_tier":"glance","summary":{"core_problem":"探究为什么参数量更大、同样使用 CLIP 作为视觉编码器的视觉语言模型（VLM，如 GPT-4V, LLaVA）在标准图像分类任务上的表现显著不如原始的 CLIP 模型。","importance":"分析与机制级贡献。揭示了 VLM 在图像分类任务上表现不佳的根本原因在于数据处理和训练目标，而非模型架构或推理算法。这对于理解 VLM 的能力边界、指导后续 VLM 的预训练数据配比和训练策略具有重要的启发意义。","technical_approach":"通过控制变量法，系统地探索了推理算法、训练目标和数据处理对 VLM 图像分类性能的影响。核心发现是：图像分类所需的关键信息实际上已经编码在 VLM 的潜在空间（latent space）中，但由于 VLM 的训练数据（主要是图文对话和复杂指令）缺乏足够的、直接的图像-类别映射信号，导致模型无法有效地将这些信息解码为分类结果。","experiments":"对比了 GPT-4V, LLaVA 等 VLM 与 CLIP 在 ImageNet 等标准图像分类基准上的表现。实验证实，即使 VLM 的参数量远大于 CLIP，其分类准确率依然大幅落后。通过分析 latent space，证明了分类信息的保留。具体的性能差距和 latent space 分析方法需参考原论文。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Investigates why Vision-Language Models (VLMs like GPT-4V, LLaVA), despite having more parameters and using CLIP as a vision encoder, significantly underperform the original CLIP model on standard image classification tasks.","importance":"Analytical and mechanistic contribution. Reveals that the root cause of VLMs' poor performance in image classification lies in data processing and training objectives, rather than model architecture or inference algorithms. This provides important insights for understanding the capability boundaries of VLMs and guiding future VLM pre-training data mixtures and training strategies.","technical_approach":"Systematically explores the impact of inference algorithms, training objectives, and data processing on VLM image classification performance through controlled experiments. The core finding is that the critical information required for image classification is actually encoded in the VLM's latent space. However, because VLM training data (primarily image-text dialogues and complex instructions) lacks sufficient, direct image-class mapping signals, the model cannot effectively decode this information into classification results.","experiments":"Compared the performance of VLMs (GPT-4V, LLaVA) and CLIP on standard image classification benchmarks like ImageNet. Experiments confirmed that even with significantly more parameters, VLM classification accuracy lags far behind. Analysis of the latent space proved the retention of classification information. Specific performance gaps and latent space analysis methods require reference to the original paper.","authors_note":""},"tags":["vlm","image-classification","visual-grounding","evaluation"],"keywords":["vision-language models","image classification"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"现有的专有和开源 VLM（如 GPT-4V 和 LLaVA）在标准图像分类基准上显著落后于 CLIP。","claim_en":"Existing proprietary and public VLMs (like GPT-4V and LLaVA) significantly underperform CLIP on standard image classification benchmarks.","evidence_anchor":"Abstract"}],"contested":[{"claim_zh":"VLM 在图像分类上表现不佳的主要原因是数据相关的：分类关键信息已编码在潜在空间中，但缺乏足够的训练数据来有效解码。","claim_en":"The primary cause of VLMs' poor performance in image classification is data-related: critical information is encoded in the latent space but can only be effectively decoded with enough training data.","opposes":"VLM 表现不佳可能是由于其复杂的自回归生成架构或推理算法不适合简单的分类任务。","opposes_cite_hint":"","evidence_anchor":"Abstract","why_contested":"排除了架构和推理算法的嫌疑，将问题精确定位到了训练数据的分布和目标上，指出了 VLM '懂但说不出' 的现象。"}]},"recommendation":{"zh":"揭示VLM分类性能弱于CLIP的核心原因是训练数据缺分类信号，作为VLM能力边界相关文献备查，跳过正文。","en":"Reveals VLMs underperform CLIP on classification due to lack of classification signals in training data, for VLM capability boundary reference, skip full text."}},{"id":"ZhangW0024","title":"Adversarial Representation Engineering: A General Model Editing Framework for Large Language Models","authors":["Yihao Zhang","Zeming Wei","Jun Sun","Meng Sun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1e7","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhangW0024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhangW0024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e4630f7c0660d944c132455c124e7d90-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"现有大模型基于内部表示的编辑方法缺乏通用灵活性，此前研究多聚焦通过表示解释模型行为，落地到多场景模型编辑需求时存在鲁棒性差、泛化性不足的问题，无法满足大模型快速修正的迫切需求。","importance":"这是模型编辑领域的方法级贡献，提出的通用编辑框架不需要修改模型权重，仅通过表示层面的判别器引导编辑过程，降低了不同编辑场景的适配成本，对预训练后模型知识修正、内容对齐等pretrain与posttrain接口方向研究有参考价值。","technical_approach":"属于表示编辑方向的改进型方法，核心是引入对抗训练的表示判别器作为编辑 oracle（判断编辑是否生效的反馈源），不需要微调模型参数也不需要大量编辑标注数据。和之前直接修改特定层激活的表示编辑方法相比，增加了判别器的分布约束，仅需调整目标表示的约束即可适配不同编辑需求，舍弃了对模型参数的直接修改，避免编辑后损害模型原有通用能力。","experiments":"提供的论文摘要为截断版本，未披露完整实验设置、模型参数量、基线对比及量化结果，无公开 ablation 与scaling相关观察数据。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Existing representation-based LLM editing methods lack generalizability and robustness. Prior works mostly focus on interpreting LLM behaviors via internal representations, but fail to deliver practical, efficient solutions for flexible editing across multiple scenarios, which cannot meet the urgent demand for fast LLM correction.","importance":"This is a method-level contribution in the LLM editing domain. The proposed general editing framework does not require modifying model weights, and only uses a representation-level discriminator to guide the editing process. It reduces adaptation cost across editing scenarios, and provides insights for research on post-pretrain knowledge correction and alignment.","technical_approach":"It is an improved representation editing method that introduces an adversarially trained representation discriminator as the editing oracle. Unlike prior works that directly modify model parameters or layer activations, it only adjusts target representation distribution constraints to fit different editing requirements, and avoids degrades no damage to the model's original general capabilities by skipping direct parameter modification.","experiments":"The provided abstract is truncated. Full experimental setup, model size, baseline comparison and quantitative results are not disclosed. No ablation or scaling observation data is available.","authors_note":""},"tags":["model-editing","representation-engineering","adversarial","llm"],"keywords":["Model editing","AI safety","Large language model","Trustworthy LLM"],"views":{"consensus":[{"claim_zh":"大模型的知识与行为模式编码在内部表示中，可通过修改内部表示干预模型输出。","claim_en":"Knowledge and behavior patterns of LLMs are encoded in internal representations, and model outputs can be intervened by modifying these representations.","evidence_anchor":"§1 Introduction"}],"contested":[]},"recommendation":{"zh":"提出无需修改权重的通用大模型表示编辑框架，只读核心方法部分即可，可参考用于预训练后模型对齐的相关实验。","en":"Proposes weight-free universal LLM editing framework, only read core method section, can be referenced for post-pretraining alignment experiments."}},{"id":"ZhaoSCRFZJ0D024","title":"Octopus: A Multi-modal LLM with Parallel Recognition and Sequential Understanding","authors":["Chuyang Zhao","Yuxin Song","Junru Chen","Kang Rong","Haocheng Feng","Gang Zhang","Shufan Ji","Jingdong Wang","Errui Ding","Yifan Sun"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1e8","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhaoSCRFZJ0D024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhaoSCRFZJ0D024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/a3eadeebbc9eecd621086f6978865a85-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注的是多模态 LLM 里一个常见矛盾：感知编码通常希望并行、高吞吐，语言理解与生成通常是顺序建模，两者放在同一系统里很容易彼此拖累。标题里的“Parallel Recognition and Sequential Understanding”已经点明作者想解决的是识别效率和统一语义建模之间的结构冲突。","importance":"它的潜在价值在于多模态预训练架构设计，而不是单个下游任务提分。如果 Octopus 真能把并行感知和顺序理解拆开处理再有效对齐，那么对 unified multimodal pretraining 有启发：不同模态未必都该被硬塞进同一种 token-by-token 生成流程，尤其视觉/语音前端更适合并行编码，语义层再交给 LLM 统一整合。这个方向和原生多模态模型设计直接相关。","technical_approach":"由于摘要缺失，只能依据标题做谨慎判断。Octopus 很可能采用了双阶段或双通路结构：前端对视觉等模态做并行 recognition，快速提取高密度表示；后端用顺序式 LLM 做跨模态 understanding 和生成。这样的设计通常是在延迟、吞吐和表达能力之间做折中：保留并行编码器的效率，不强求所有视觉细节都序列化成超长 token 流，同时又让语言模型承担最终语义组合与对话能力。和纯统一 AR 或纯 encoder-decoder 多模态方案相比，它更强调 recognition 与 understanding 的职责分离。边界在于，如果前端抽取得过于任务化或信息压缩过强，后端统一建模能力会受限。","experiments":"由于没有摘要，无法可靠给出模型规模、训练数据、baseline 或指标。按标题推断，实验大概率会覆盖多模态理解与生成任务，并对并行识别带来的效率收益做报告。真正值得看的不是单个 benchmark 分数，而是结构设计是否同时改善了延迟和质量，以及识别前端的并行化是否会损伤复杂推理、细粒度 grounding 或长链多模态对话表现。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper appears to target a common multimodal design tension: perception favors parallel processing, while language understanding and generation are inherently sequential. The title suggests the goal is to resolve this mismatch instead of forcing all modalities through the same serial pipeline.","importance":"Its likely significance is architectural and directly relevant to multimodal pretraining. If Octopus can separate fast parallel recognition from slower sequential understanding while preserving a unified semantic interface, that would be a useful design point for native multimodal LMs. It would argue against the view that every modality must be fully tokenized and autoregressively modeled in the same way.","technical_approach":"Because no abstract is provided, only a cautious inference is possible from the title. Octopus likely uses a split design: a parallel recognition front-end for perception-heavy modalities such as vision, followed by a sequential language model that performs cross-modal understanding and generation. The appeal of this design is clear: keep perceptual encoding efficient, avoid extremely long serialized token streams for non-language inputs, and still let the LLM perform semantic integration and dialogue. Compared with fully unified autoregressive modeling or pure encoder-decoder VLMs, this suggests a stronger division of labor between recognition and understanding. The trade-off is that aggressive front-end compression can discard information needed for downstream reasoning or grounding.","experiments":"Without an abstract, model scale, training data, baselines, and metrics cannot be summarized reliably. The evaluation likely covers both multimodal understanding and generation, plus efficiency measurements tied to parallel recognition. The most meaningful evidence would be whether the architecture improves latency or throughput without degrading compositional reasoning, fine-grained grounding, or long-form multimodal interaction.","authors_note":""},"tags":["mllm","parallel-recognition","sequential-understanding"],"notable_authors":["Chuyang Zhao","Yuxin Song","Junru Chen","Kang Rong","Haocheng Feng"],"keywords":["multimodal large language model","large language model","object detection"],"recommendation":{"zh":"提出并行感知+顺序理解的多模态大模型双通路架构，只读架构设计部分即可，可参考原生多模态预训练架构设计。","en":"Proposes dual-path MLLM architecture with parallel perception and sequential understanding, only read architecture design section, useful for native multimodal pretraining design."}},{"id":"ZhouLNTW24","title":"Divergences between Language Models and Human Brains","authors":["Yuchen Zhou","Emmy Liu","Graham Neubig","Michael J. Tarr","Leila Wehbe"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1e9","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhouLNTW24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhouLNTW24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/f96839fc751b67492e17e70f5c9730e4-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"这篇工作关注的是：语言模型和人脑在语言处理上的相似性被讲得很多，但它们具体在哪些地方分歧更大，仍缺少系统刻画。相比只寻找 brain-LM alignment，这篇论文更强调 divergence，也就是哪些现象是 LM 做得到但大脑不像这么做，或反过来。","importance":"它的重要性主要在机制理解和认知对照。对 pretrain 研究而言，这类工作不会直接改训练 recipe，但能帮助判断当前语言模型学到的表征到底更像语言能力本身，还是更像大规模统计拟合器。理解这些分歧有助于我们区分哪些能力来自通用预测训练，哪些能力可能需要不同归纳偏置、记忆机制或交互信号。","technical_approach":"由于摘要缺失，只能根据标题做保守解读。论文大概率将脑成像或行为数据与 LM 表征/预测进行对齐分析，但重点不是最大化相关性，而是系统寻找偏差来源，例如时间动态、语义组合、世界知识调用、或对局部词形统计的依赖。和常见的 encoding/decoding brain benchmark 相比，这类工作更有价值的地方在于它不把高相关当作终点，而是反向利用不匹配来定位模型机制缺口。边界是：brain-LM 比较很依赖任务设计和测量分辨率，结论常是 suggestive 而不是决定性的。","experiments":"没有摘要，因此无法确认用了哪类脑数据、哪些 LM、以及量化差异多大。按标题推断，实验应围绕多种语言处理现象比较人脑与模型反应模式，重点在 divergence map 而非单个对齐分数。真正值得看的结果是：这些分歧是否在不同模型家族、尺度和训练目标下稳定存在；如果存在，是否能指向特定训练偏置，例如 next-token 目标对短程统计的过度偏好。","authors_note":"作者列表包含 Graham Neubig、Michael J. Tarr、Leila Wehbe。具体机构无法从当前输入准确确认。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"The paper appears to ask a corrective question: beyond similarities, where do language models and human brains systematically diverge? Much prior work emphasizes alignment between LM representations and neural or behavioral data, but that can obscure the mismatches that are often more informative.","importance":"Its contribution is likely mechanistic and comparative rather than directly algorithmic. For pretraining research, such work helps clarify which aspects of language competence emerge from generic next-token prediction and which may require different inductive biases, memory structures, or interaction signals. Divergences are especially useful when alignment results are otherwise easy to over-interpret.","technical_approach":"Without the abstract, only a title-based summary is possible. The paper likely compares brain measurements or behavioral responses with LM representations and predictions, but focuses on where the correspondence breaks down rather than where it peaks. That could involve differences in temporal processing, compositional semantics, world-knowledge retrieval, or dependence on local lexical statistics. Compared with standard brain-encoding benchmarks, the methodological value here is treating mismatch as signal rather than noise. The limitation is that conclusions in this area are highly sensitive to the measurement modality, task design, and resolution of the brain data.","experiments":"No abstract is provided, so the datasets, models, and quantitative findings cannot be summarized reliably. The likely evaluation compares multiple LMs against human neural or behavioral responses across several language phenomena and reports a divergence profile rather than a single alignment score. The most useful result would be whether the same divergences persist across model scales and families, suggesting a training-objective-level bias rather than an artifact of one architecture.","authors_note":"The author list includes Graham Neubig, Michael J. Tarr, and Leila Wehbe. Exact institutional affiliations cannot be confirmed from the provided input."},"tags":["interpretability","representation","brain-alignment"],"notable_authors":["Yuchen Zhou","Emmy Liu","Graham Neubig","Michael J. Tarr","Leila Wehbe"],"keywords":["Natural Language Processing","NLP","Brain Imaging","Neuroimaging","Magnetoencephalography","MEG","Neuroscience","Cognitive Science","Interpretability","Deep Learning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"系统分析语言模型与人脑语言处理的分歧点，只读结果分析章节即可，可参考理解预训练LM表征的本质。","en":"Systematically analyzes divergences between LM and human brain language processing, only read result analysis section, useful for understanding pretrained LM representation nature."}},{"id":"2402.03620","title":"SELF-DISCOVER: Large Language Models Self-Compose Reasoning Structures","authors":["Pei Zhou","Jay Pujara","Xiang Ren","Xinyun Chen","Heng-Tze Cheng","Quoc V. Le","Ed H. Chi","Denny Zhou","Swaroop Mishra","Huaixiu Steven Zheng"],"institutions":["Google DeepMind","University of Southern California"],"abstract":"$1ea","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03620","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhouP0CCLCZMZ24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhouP0CCLCZMZ24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/e41efb03e20ca3c231940a3c6917ef6f-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"agent","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"复杂推理任务中，固定的 prompting 策略（如 CoT）无法适配不同任务的内在推理结构，导致性能瓶颈。之前的方法要么用单一推理模板，要么靠大量采样（如 CoT-Self-Consistency）来弥补，计算开销大且效果有限。","importance":"方法级贡献。SELF-DISCOVER 展示了让 LLM 自主组合推理模块的可行性，对 pretrain 研究的启示在于：模型在预训练阶段习得的多种推理能力可以被显式解耦和重组，这为理解 LLM 内部推理机制、以及设计更好的 pretrain/posttrain 接口提供了线索。同时，它在推理效率上比 Self-Consistency 节省 10-40x 计算量，说明结构化引导比暴力采样更高效。","technical_approach":"核心是两阶段框架：第一阶段让 LLM 从一组预定义的原子推理模块（如批判性思维、分步推理、类比推理等）中自主选择并组合成一个任务专属的推理结构（JSON 格式的 action plan）；第二阶段用这个结构引导 LLM 逐步解码。关键设计选择是把推理结构的发现过程也交给 LLM 自身完成，而非人工设计或搜索，这使得方法具有跨任务泛化能力。与 CoT 的区别在于 CoT 是固定的线性链式结构，而 SELF-DISCOVER 生成的是任务自适应的多模块组合结构。","experiments":"在 GPT-4 和 PaLM 2 上测试，覆盖 BigBench-Hard、grounded agent reasoning 和 MATH 等挑战性基准。相比 CoT 最高提升 32%，相比 CoT-Self-Consistency 提升超过 20%，同时推理计算量仅为后者的 1/10 到 1/40。这个效率-性能的 trade-off 是该工作最有说服力的结果。","authors_note":"作者包括 Xinyun Chen（Google DeepMind，代表性工作包括代码生成和 LLM 推理方向）、Xiang Ren（USC）、Jay Pujara（USC ISI）。团队横跨 Google DeepMind 和 USC。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Fixed prompting strategies like CoT cannot adapt to the intrinsic reasoning structure of diverse complex tasks. Prior approaches either use a single template or rely on expensive sampling (e.g., CoT-Self-Consistency) to compensate.","importance":"Method-level contribution. Demonstrates that LLMs can self-compose task-specific reasoning structures from atomic modules, achieving better accuracy at 10-40x less compute than sampling-based methods. For pretrain research, it suggests that diverse reasoning capabilities acquired during pretraining can be explicitly decomposed and recombined, informing how we think about emergent reasoning and pretrain-posttrain interfaces.","technical_approach":"Two-stage framework: (1) LLM selects and composes atomic reasoning modules (critical thinking, step-by-step, analogy, etc.) into a task-specific reasoning structure (JSON action plan); (2) LLM follows this structure during decoding. The key design choice is delegating structure discovery to the LLM itself rather than manual design or search, enabling cross-task generalization. Unlike CoT's fixed linear chain, SELF-DISCOVER produces adaptive multi-module compositions.","experiments":"Tested on GPT-4 and PaLM 2 across BigBench-Hard, grounded agent reasoning, and MATH. Up to 32% improvement over CoT, >20% over CoT-Self-Consistency, while using 10-40x fewer inference compute. The efficiency-accuracy tradeoff is the most compelling result.","authors_note":"Authors include Xinyun Chen (Google DeepMind, known for code generation and LLM reasoning), Xiang Ren and Jay Pujara (USC). Joint Google DeepMind and USC team."},"tags":["reasoning","prompting","cot","planning"],"notable_authors":["Xinyun Chen","Xiang Ren","Jay Pujara"],"keywords":["Large Language Models","Reasoning","Prompting","Self-Improve","Self-Discover"],"recommendation":{"zh":"提出LLM自主组合推理模块的SELF-DISCOVER框架，只读框架设计部分即可，可参考预训练推理能力相关设计。","en":"Proposes SELF-DISCOVER framework for LLM self-composed reasoning structures, only read framework design section, useful for reasoning-related pretraining design."}},{"id":"ZhouTZLW024","title":"Can Language Models Perform Robust Reasoning in Chain-of-thought Prompting with Noisy Rationales?","authors":["Zhanke Zhou","Rong Tao","Jianing Zhu","Yiwen Luo","Zengmao Wang","Bo Han"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1eb","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhouTZLW024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhouTZLW024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/dfaa29ed28dfa175bcc5e2a54aa199f8-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"CoT prompting 在实际场景中面临一个被忽视的鲁棒性问题：当推理链中混入噪声（错误的中间步骤或无关信息）时，LLM 的推理性能会显著退化。之前的 CoT 研究大多假设 rationale 是干净的，对噪声场景缺乏系统研究。","importance":"分析级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的价值在于揭示了 LLM 对推理链质量的敏感性——这直接关系到 pretrain 阶段数据中推理链质量的影响、以及 CoT 数据用于 continual pretrain 或 mid-train 时的数据清洗需求。也为理解 ICL 和 CoT 的机制提供了实证证据。","technical_approach":"系统研究 CoT prompting 在 noisy rationale 条件下的表现，构建了包含不同类型和程度噪声的推理链测试场景。具体方法细节因 abstract 缺失无法确认。","experiments":"具体实验设置和数据因 abstract 缺失无法确认。预期在多个推理基准上测试了不同噪声条件下的性能退化模式。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"CoT prompting faces an underexplored robustness issue: when rationales contain noise (incorrect intermediate steps or irrelevant information), LLM reasoning performance degrades significantly. Most CoT research assumes clean rationales.","importance":"Analysis-level contribution. Reveals LLM sensitivity to reasoning chain quality, directly relevant to understanding how rationale quality in pretraining data affects model capabilities, and informing data cleaning requirements when using CoT data for continual pretraining or mid-training.","technical_approach":"Systematic study of CoT prompting under noisy rationale conditions, constructing test scenarios with varying noise types and levels. Specific method details unavailable due to missing abstract.","experiments":"Specific experimental details unavailable due to missing abstract. Expected to characterize performance degradation patterns across reasoning benchmarks under different noise conditions.","authors_note":""},"tags":["cot","reasoning","robustness","prompting"],"keywords":["Large language models","Chain of thoughts","Noisy rationales","Reasoning robustness"],"recommendation":{"zh":"分析带噪声推理链下CoT的鲁棒性问题，只读实验结论部分即可，可参考预训练CoT数据的清洗策略设计。","en":"Studies CoT robustness under noisy rationales, only read experiment conclusion section, useful for CoT data cleaning strategy design in pretraining."}},{"id":"ZhuDLL024","title":"Are Large Language Models Good Statisticians?","authors":["Yizhang Zhu","Shiyin Du","Boyan Li","Yuyu Luo","Nan Tang"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1ec","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"datasets_benchmarks","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhuDLL024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhuDLL024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/729786203d330da046dd8091c2d92a66-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"LLM 在统计分析任务上的能力缺乏系统评估。统计推断（假设检验、回归分析、分布拟合等）需要严格的数学推理和对数据特征的理解，但现有 LLM 评估基准很少覆盖这类任务。","importance":"评估/基准级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的价值在于提供了一个新的能力探针——统计推理能力可以反映 LLM 在数学推理、数值理解和结构化分析方面的预训练质量。但整体偏向能力评估而非方法改进。","technical_approach":"构建了评估 LLM 统计分析能力的基准，覆盖多种统计任务。具体任务设计和评估协议因 abstract 缺失无法确认。","experiments":"具体实验细节因 abstract 缺失无法确认。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"LLM capabilities on statistical analysis tasks lack systematic evaluation. Statistical inference requires rigorous mathematical reasoning and data understanding, but existing LLM benchmarks rarely cover such tasks.","importance":"Benchmark-level contribution. Provides a new capability probe for pretrain quality — statistical reasoning reflects mathematical reasoning, numerical understanding, and structured analysis capabilities. Primarily an evaluation rather than a methodological contribution.","technical_approach":"Constructs a benchmark for evaluating LLM statistical analysis capabilities across multiple statistical tasks. Specific task design and evaluation protocols unavailable due to missing abstract.","experiments":"Specific experimental details unavailable due to missing abstract.","authors_note":""},"tags":["reasoning","evaluation","statistics","llm-behavior"],"keywords":["statistical question answering","statistical reasoning","benchmark evaluation","large language model"],"recommendation":{"zh":"构建了LLM统计分析能力的评估基准，只读基准设计和测试结果部分即可，可作为预训练数值推理能力的探针。","en":"Builds evaluation benchmark for LLM statistical analysis capability, only read benchmark design and test result sections, can be used as pretrained numerical reasoning probe."}},{"id":"2406.04801","title":"MoE Jetpack: From Dense Checkpoints to Adaptive Mixture of Experts for Vision Tasks","authors":["Xingkui Zhu","Yiran Guan","Dingkang Liang","Yuchao Chen","Yuliang Liu","Xiang Bai"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1ed","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.04801","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhuGLCLB24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhuGLCLB24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/167bcf2af2cd08fcf75b932022db0311-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"efficient","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"MoE 模型从头训练需要大量数据和算力，而公开的预训练权重几乎都是 dense 模型，导致 MoE 在视觉任务中的采用受限。如何高效地将已有的 dense checkpoint 转化为 MoE 模型是一个实际痛点。","importance":"方法级贡献。虽然聚焦视觉任务，但 dense-to-MoE 转换的思路对 LLM pretrain 有直接参考价值——在 NLP 领域同样面临 dense checkpoint 丰富但 MoE checkpoint 稀缺的问题。checkpoint recycling 和 hyperspherical expert 初始化的技术路线可以迁移到语言模型的 MoE 升级场景（如 continual pretrain 中从 dense 切换到 MoE）。","technical_approach":"MoE Jetpack 包含两个核心技术：(1) Checkpoint Recycling——直接复用 dense checkpoint 作为 MoE 模型的初始权重，加速收敛并降低训练成本；(2) Hyperspherical expert 初始化或路由策略（abstract 截断，具体细节不完整），目的是确保 expert 之间的多样性和利用率。关键设计选择是不从头训练 MoE，而是把 dense 模型的知识作为 warm start，这在训练效率和最终精度之间取得了好的平衡。","experiments":"具体数字因 abstract 截断不完整。从描述看，在视觉任务上验证了从 timm 等公开 dense checkpoint 转换为 MoE 后的收敛加速和精度提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Training MoE models from scratch requires massive data and compute, while publicly available pretrained weights are almost exclusively dense models. This limits MoE adoption, especially in vision. Efficiently converting dense checkpoints to MoE is a practical bottleneck.","importance":"Method-level contribution. Though focused on vision, the dense-to-MoE conversion approach is directly transferable to LLM pretraining — the same checkpoint scarcity problem exists for language MoE models. The checkpoint recycling technique is relevant to scenarios like upgrading dense LLMs to MoE during continual pretraining.","technical_approach":"MoE Jetpack has two core techniques: (1) Checkpoint Recycling — reuses dense checkpoint weights as MoE initialization, accelerating convergence and reducing training cost; (2) A hyperspherical expert initialization or routing strategy (abstract truncated, details incomplete) to ensure expert diversity and utilization. The key design choice is warm-starting from dense knowledge rather than training MoE from scratch.","experiments":"Specific numbers incomplete due to abstract truncation. Validates on vision tasks using public dense checkpoints from timm, demonstrating faster convergence and improved accuracy after dense-to-MoE conversion.","authors_note":""},"tags":["moe","checkpoint-conversion","efficiency","vision"],"keywords":["deep learning","computer vision","mixture of experts","weight initialization","fine-tuning"],"recommendation":{"zh":"提出将dense视觉预训练权重转换为MoE的方法，只读权重复用和专家初始化部分即可，可迁移到LLM dense转MoE预训练场景。","en":"Proposes dense checkpoint to MoE conversion method, only read weight reuse and expert initialization sections, can be migrated to LLM dense-to-MoE pretraining scenarios."}},{"id":"2409.19967","title":"Magnet: We Never Know How Text-to-Image Diffusion Models Work, Until We Learn How Vision-Language Models Function","authors":["Chenyi Zhuang","Ying Hu","Pan Gao"],"institutions":[],"abstract":"$1ee","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.19967","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZhuangHG24","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZhuangHG24","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/688ffe062732aabd87dfe57bcb0bf3ae-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"mechanism","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"Text-to-image diffusion 模型（尤其是 Stable Diffusion）在处理包含多个属性和对象的复杂 prompt 时，经常出现属性绑定错误（attribute binding failure）——比如把红色绑到了错误的对象上。之前的研究指出 blended text embedding 是原因之一，但缺乏深入分析。","importance":"分析+方法级贡献。对 pretrain 研究的价值在于深入剖析了 CLIP text encoder 的属性理解局限性——这是 VLM 预训练中文本-视觉对齐的核心组件。发现的 attribute bias 和 padding embedding 的上下文纠缠问题，对理解 CLIP 类模型的表示空间特性有参考价值，但整体偏向 text-to-image 生成的应用层面。","technical_approach":"Magnet 是一个 training-free 的方法，通过分析 CLIP text encoder 中的 attribute bias 现象和 padding embedding 的上下文纠缠问题，在推理时修正属性绑定。核心发现是 CLIP 文本空间中存在系统性的属性偏差，且 padding token 的 embedding 会不当地纠缠不同概念。方法在不需要额外训练的情况下改善了属性绑定准确性。","experiments":"具体实验数字因 abstract 截断不完整。在复杂多属性 prompt 的图像生成任务上验证了属性绑定准确性的提升。","authors_note":""},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"Text-to-image diffusion models (especially Stable Diffusion) frequently produce attribute binding errors on complex prompts with multiple attributes and objects. Prior work identified blended text embeddings as a cause but lacked in-depth analysis.","importance":"Analysis + method-level contribution. Valuable for pretrain research through its deep examination of CLIP text encoder limitations in attribute understanding — a core component in VLM pretraining for text-vision alignment. The discovered attribute bias and padding embedding entanglement provide insights into CLIP representation space properties, though the work is primarily oriented toward text-to-image generation.","technical_approach":"Magnet is a training-free approach that addresses attribute binding by analyzing attribute bias in CLIP text space and contextual entanglement in padding embeddings. Key finding: CLIP text space exhibits systematic attribute bias, and padding token embeddings improperly entangle different concepts. The method corrects attribute binding at inference time without additional training.","experiments":"Specific numbers incomplete due to abstract truncation. Validates improved attribute binding accuracy on complex multi-attribute prompt image generation tasks.","authors_note":""},"tags":["diffusion","vlm","interpretability","compositionality"],"keywords":["Image Generation","Diffusion Models","Vision-Language Models","Attribute Binding"],"recommendation":{"zh":"剖析CLIP文本编码器属性绑定错误的根源，只读核心发现和免训练修正部分即可，可参考VLM预训练的图文对齐优化。","en":"Discovers root cause of CLIP text encoder attribute binding failure, only read core findings and training-free correction sections, useful for VLM pretraining text-image alignment optimization."}},{"id":"2404.13046","title":"MoVA: Adapting Mixture of Vision Experts to Multimodal Context","authors":["Zhuofan Zong","Bingqi Ma","Dazhong Shen","Guanglu Song","Hao Shao","Dongzhi Jiang","Hongsheng Li","Yu Liu"],"institutions":["SenseTime"],"abstract":"$1ef","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"track":"main","award":"poster","links":{"arxiv":"https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.13046","pdf":"","openreview":"","dblp":"https://dblp.org/rec/conf/nips/ZongMSSSJL024","doi":""},"_dblp_key":"conf/nips/ZongMSSSJL024","_ee":"http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/bb0fea29f7aa6ede17e906ac6a225f34-Abstract-Conference.html","category_id":"multimodal","relevance_score":5,"reading_tier":"skim","summary":{"core_problem":"多模态大语言模型（MLLM）中，没有单一视觉编码器能在所有图像内容类型上都表现最优——CLIP 擅长通用图像理解但在文档/图表上表现差，DINOv2 等则有不同的偏好。之前的方法要么只用一个编码器忍受偏差，要么简单拼接多个编码器但缺乏自适应融合。","importance":"方法级贡献，对 VLM 预训练有直接参考价值。MoVA 的核心洞察是视觉编码器的选择不应该是静态的，而应该根据输入内容动态路由——这与 MoE 的思想一致但应用在视觉编码器层面。对设计 native multimodal 预训练中的视觉前端有启发：与其追求一个万能编码器，不如设计自适应的多编码器融合机制。","technical_approach":"MoVA 将多个预训练视觉编码器（CLIP、DINOv2 等）作为 vision experts，通过一个 coarse-to-fine 的自适应路由和融合机制，根据输入图像内容动态选择和组合最合适的视觉特征。先做粗粒度的 expert 选择（哪些编码器对当前输入最有用），再做细粒度的特征融合。与简单 ensemble 的区别在于路由是 input-dependent 的，避免了不相关编码器特征的干扰。","experiments":"具体数字因 abstract 截断不完整。在多种 MLLM 基准上验证，覆盖通用图像理解、文档理解、图表理解等不同内容类型。核心观察是单一编码器在跨内容类型时性能差异显著，MoVA 的自适应融合能在各类型上都接近或超过最优单编码器。","authors_note":"作者包括 Guanglu Song 和 Hao Shao，团队可能来自商汤或相关机构（从作者组合推断，但无法完全确认）。"},"summary_en":{"core_problem":"No single vision encoder dominates all image content types in MLLMs — CLIP excels at general images but struggles with documents/charts, while DINOv2 has different strengths. Prior approaches either accept single-encoder bias or naively concatenate multiple encoders without adaptive fusion.","importance":"Method-level contribution directly relevant to VLM pretraining. MoVA's key insight is that vision encoder selection should be dynamic and content-dependent, applying MoE principles at the vision encoder level. This informs native multimodal pretraining design: instead of pursuing one universal encoder, design adaptive multi-encoder fusion mechanisms.","technical_approach":"MoVA treats multiple pretrained vision encoders (CLIP, DINOv2, etc.) as vision experts, using a coarse-to-fine adaptive routing and fusion mechanism to dynamically select and combine the most suitable visual features based on input image content. Coarse-grained expert selection identifies which encoders are most useful, followed by fine-grained feature fusion. Unlike simple ensembling, routing is input-dependent, avoiding interference from irrelevant encoder features.","experiments":"Specific numbers incomplete due to abstract truncation. Validated across multiple MLLM benchmarks covering general image understanding, document understanding, and chart understanding. Key observation: single encoders show significant performance variance across content types; MoVA's adaptive fusion matches or exceeds the best single encoder on each type.","authors_note":"Authors include Guanglu Song and Hao Shao, team likely from SenseTime or affiliated institution (inferred from author combination, not fully confirmed)."},"tags":["vlm","mixture-of-experts","visual-encoder","mllm"],"notable_authors":["Guanglu Song"],"keywords":["Multimodal large language model","Vision encoder","Mixture-of-expert"],"recommendation":{"zh":"提出多视觉专家自适应路由的MLLM视觉前端，只读路由与融合机制部分即可，可参考多模态预训练视觉前端设计。","en":"Proposes adaptive routing multi-vision-expert MLLM vision front-end, only read routing and fusion mechanism sections, useful for multimodal pretraining vision front-end design."}}]},"allConferences":[{"slug":"acl-2025","venue":"ACL","year":2025,"full_name":"Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics","total_relevant":641,"total_fetched":3380,"by_award":{"poster":626,"best_paper":3,"outstanding_paper":12},"by_track":{"long":367,"findings":231,"short":18,"industry":10,"srw":6,"demo":6,"main":3},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T00:45:57.823033+00:00"},{"slug":"acl-2024","venue":"ACL","year":2024,"full_name":"Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics","total_relevant":385,"total_fetched":2145,"by_award":{"poster":385},"by_track":{"long":185,"findings":173,"srw":5,"short":9,"main":13},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T22:50:37.051621+00:00"},{"slug":"acl-2023","venue":"ACL","year":2023,"full_name":"Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics","total_relevant":424,"total_fetched":2876,"by_award":{"poster":424},"by_track":{"findings":156,"long":196,"short":30,"demo":6,"main":25,"srw":4,"industry":7},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T09:44:43.509860+00:00"},{"slug":"emnlp-2025","venue":"EMNLP","year":2025,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","total_relevant":915,"total_fetched":3499,"by_award":{"poster":912,"outstanding_paper":2,"best_paper":1},"by_track":{"main":532,"findings":353,"industry":30},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T07:35:55.574285+00:00"},{"slug":"emnlp-2024","venue":"EMNLP","year":2024,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","total_relevant":718,"total_fetched":2460,"by_award":{"poster":718},"by_track":{"main":427,"industry":20,"findings":265,"demo":6},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T03:40:34.148010+00:00"},{"slug":"emnlp-2023","venue":"EMNLP","year":2023,"full_name":"Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing","total_relevant":472,"total_fetched":2310,"by_award":{"poster":472},"by_track":{"main":261,"findings":193,"industry":8,"demo":10},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T08:32:10.890267+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2026","venue":"ICLR","year":2026,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":1053,"total_fetched":5470,"by_award":{"poster":995,"oral":58},"by_track":{"main":1053},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T01:40:59.513393+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2025","venue":"ICLR","year":2025,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":1979,"total_fetched":3720,"by_award":{"spotlight":193,"poster":1665,"oral":121},"by_track":{"main":1979},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T18:27:18.207575+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2024","venue":"ICLR","year":2024,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":851,"total_fetched":2456,"by_award":{"poster":682,"spotlight":130,"oral":39},"by_track":{"main":851},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T17:50:03.172895+00:00"},{"slug":"iclr-2023","venue":"ICLR","year":2023,"full_name":"International Conference on Learning Representations","total_relevant":294,"total_fetched":1794,"by_award":{"poster":294},"by_track":{"main":294},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T11:29:30.626329+00:00"},{"slug":"icml-2025","venue":"ICML","year":2025,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","total_relevant":516,"total_fetched":3332,"by_award":{"poster":462,"oral":18,"spotlight":36},"by_track":{"main":510,"position":6},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T20:04:14.360455+00:00"},{"slug":"icml-2024","venue":"ICML","year":2024,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","total_relevant":335,"total_fetched":3321,"by_award":{"poster":292,"spotlight":15,"oral":28},"by_track":{"main":335},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T18:50:07.833195+00:00"},{"slug":"icml-2023","venue":"ICML","year":2023,"full_name":"International Conference on Machine Learning","total_relevant":297,"total_fetched":2934,"by_award":{"poster":297},"by_track":{"main":297},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:21:49.394726+00:00"},{"slug":"naacl-2025","venue":"NAACL","year":2025,"full_name":"North American Chapter of the ACL","total_relevant":385,"total_fetched":1376,"by_award":{"poster":385},"by_track":{"long":206,"findings":121,"industry":12,"demo":10,"srw":11,"short":25},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:50:05.821261+00:00"},{"slug":"naacl-2024","venue":"NAACL","year":2024,"full_name":"North American Chapter of the ACL","total_relevant":321,"total_fetched":1342,"by_award":{"poster":321},"by_track":{"findings":86,"long":156,"industry":7,"srw":9,"short":23,"main":36,"demo":4},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:35:26.823821+00:00"},{"slug":"neurips-2025","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2025,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","total_relevant":1338,"total_fetched":5858,"by_award":{"poster":1115,"oral":29,"spotlight":194},"by_track":{"main":1263,"datasets_benchmarks":73,"position":2},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T05:45:45.290822+00:00"},{"slug":"neurips-2024","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2024,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","total_relevant":576,"total_fetched":4561,"by_award":{"poster":505,"spotlight":59,"oral":12},"by_track":{"datasets_benchmarks":50,"main":526},"generated_at":"2026-04-18T21:58:15.480882+00:00"},{"slug":"neurips-2023","venue":"NeurIPS","year":2023,"full_name":"Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems","total_relevant":523,"total_fetched":3582,"by_award":{"spotlight":78,"poster":415,"oral":30},"by_track":{"main":471,"datasets_benchmarks":52},"generated_at":"2026-04-19T04:06:29.627949+00:00"}]}]}],["$L1f0","$L1f1"],"$L1f2"]}],"isPartial":false,"staleTime":300,"varyParams":null,"buildId":"5VfXfsVgUxhJuQG1isb0-"}
1f0:["$","script","script-0",{"src":"/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/12.3u5-pgh3xi.js","async":true}]
1f1:["$","script","script-1",{"src":"/paper-daily-site/_next/static/chunks/0r0c80niwkt55.js","async":true}]
1f2:["$","$L1f3",null,{"children":["$","$1f4",null,{"name":"Next.MetadataOutlet","children":"$@1f5"}]}]
1f5:null
